## Breakbeat
- [[1982] Electro](#1982-Electro)
- [[1986] Freestyle & Breakdance](#1986--Freestyle--Breakdance)
- [[1988] Florida Breaks (& Funky Breaks)](#1988-Florida-Breaks--Funky-Breaks)
- [[1991] Breakbeat Hardcore & Piano House (Rave II)](../master/hardcore.md#1991-Breakbeat-Hardcore--Piano-House-Rave-II)
- [[1992] Trip Hop](#1992-Trip-Hop)
- [[1994] Chemical Breaks & Big Beat](#1994-Chemical-Breaks--Big-Beat)
- [[1995] Ambient Breaks & Illbient](../master/downtempo.#1995-Ambient-Breaks--Illbient)
- [[1997] UK Garage (2-Step & Speed Garage)](../master/drumnbass.md#1997-UK-Garage-2-Step--Speed-Garage)
- [[1998] Nu Skool Breaks](#1998-Nu-Skool-Breaks)
- [[1999] Broken Beats](#1999-Broken-Beats)
- [[2001] Breakbeat Garage & Grime](#2001-Breakbeat-Garage--Grime)
- [[2004] Bassline & UK funky](#2004-Bassline--UK-funky)
- [[2005] Glitchhop & Wonky](#2005--Glitchhop--Wonky)
- [[2009] Future Garage & Future Bass](#2009-Future-Garage--Future-Bass)
- [[2012] EDM Trap / Trapstep](#2012-EDM-Trap--Trapstep)

Although **Breakbeat** is a genre defined by its technical rhythm component (see more below), there is an underlying racial aspect at stake. Just like **Rock ‘n’ Roll** is a white translation of black **Rhythm ‘n’ Blues**, so is **Breakbeat** the “Caucasian” version of black **Rap** music. Though this division is not as strong as the **R&R** / **R&B** polarity (many black artists are involved in making **Breakbeat**), it is remarkable how the overwhelming majority of **Rap** artists are black, while the overwhelming majority of **Breakbeat** artists are white (considering the fact that these two super-genres are so closely related to each other). This has spurred the necessity of a true “black Dance music genre”, leading to **Jungle**. **Breakbeat** is arguably the most difficult super-genre to outline, being propelled by eager experimental artists with highly eclectic music taste.

Most **Breakbeat** is regarded as a part of **Hip Hop** culture, as (Just like **Rap**) it is also based on the sampling of **Funk** records to make breakbeats and mostly thrives in the same subculture with corresponding techniques (such as turntablism) or elements (such as graffiti or breakdancing).

The word “breakbeat” is derived from the section of early **Funk** or **Disco** records where all instruments stop playing (breaking) and only the drummer and percussion remains, called the “breakdown”. Such a breakdown section could be used by both **Rap** and **Breakbeat** artists to create their own drum samples without the use of a real drummer and before the advent of affordable drum computers. Some samples became more frequently used as breakbeat building blocks than others and received their own name and legendary status. The “Amen Break” for example, is a well-known sample from the Winston’s **Funk** single “Amen” from 1969. James Brown’s most outspoken breakdown in “Funky Drummer” became the basis for the “Funky Drummer Break”. Honey Drippers with “Impeach the President”, “Synthetic Substitution” by Melvin Bliss and “Apache” by the Incredible Bongo Band are all rather unknown Funk records, yet technically the most played records of all time due to a countless amount of resampling.

**Rap** and **Breakbeat** artists particularly like **Funk** and **Disco** breakdowns instead of **Rock** or **Blues** ones as these funky drummers introduced “the third beat”: placing kick drums on different beats than in a straight 4/4 rhythm. Both kick drums and snare drums fall on different beats in different bars, with hi-hat on offbeat, creating an asymmetrical pattern. **Breakbeat** differs from instrumental **Rap** in a slightly higher speed (110-120bpm) and a heavier use of samples, sound effects and sound manipulation, all placed in different layers at the right point to compose an intricate rhythmical web. This means that **Breakbeat** tracks are usually too rich and layered to allow rapping on top of them. Take note: harder, more Dance oriented versions of **Breakbeat** varying between 120-140 bpm exist as well and are easily distinguishable from Rap.

The middle ground between **Breakbeat** and **Drum ‘n’ Bass** has led to a whole group of music genres that can be considered a super-genre on its own: **UK Garage** (with the inclusion of **UK Bass**). **UK Garage** started as an experiment to renew **Drum ‘n’ Bass** with influences from other EDM such as **Breakbeat** and **Garage House**, but soon evolved into a broad and separate subculture with **Dubstep** as its most well-known exponent. **UK Garage** experiments with different, unexpected rhythms (like 2-step), creating highly syncopated breakbeat music with a variety of influences to provide treble and a strong **Drum ‘n’ Bass** influence to provide ultra-deep bass. The latest forms of **UK Bass** thrive in a strong underground internet culture. With artist names impossible to pronounce and sometimes even requiring special ALT or ASCII keys to type, the underground network of pirate radio’s which made **Drum ‘n’ Bass** great in the mid-nineties, seems to have been resurrected in a new form.

### [1982] Electro
True **Electro**, the beginning of **Breakbeat**, is essentially Hip-Hop music with lots of **Krautrock** influences (particularly *Kraftwerk*). American rappers embraced the German revolutionary music and quickly started making Rap music with the aid of drum machines and sequencers, resulting in digital sampling and looping of breakbeats (instead of mixing and scratching, although these two techniques were still heavily used for extra sound effects). **Electro** has few vocals let alone raps, though if they are present they are usually vocoded. Robotic breakdancing and vocoders give **Electro** that stereotypical futuristic “robo-feel”, often imitated or parodied.

The encounter between three (!) separate music worlds (Hip-Hop, Rock, and Electronic) finds its origin in two historical key events. In 1977, the infamous radio DJ “The Electrifying Mojo” starts playing a mix of **Funk** and **Synthpop** in Detroit: Proto-Electro that brings the black **Rap** community in touch with white electronic music.

On the other hand, the experiment of **Old Skool Rap** found itself in a precarious and fragile state at the beginning of the eighties. The music never really caught on and was in danger of being suppressed by **Synthpop**, which was growing exponentially in popularity. In New York, Afrika Bambataa, principal **Electro** artist and founder, tried to please both the (white) hipster **New Wave** scene as the (black) **Hip-hop** scene from the Bronx.

With lots of spacy, robotic sounds and basic synthesizer melodies this was definitely a completely different sound than your average **Rap** song or any early eighties genre for that matter. It must come as no surprise therefore, that **Electro’s** mission was accomplished and its influence on further electronic music beyond the scale.

### [1986] Freestyle & Breakdance
Breakdancing is a fundamental element of Hip-Hop culture, as old as Hip-Hop itself. As a music genre however it doesn’t really exist. It’s a collection/mix of anything one can breakdance to: instrumental **Rap**, **Electro**, **Deep Funk**, chopped and mixed **Soul** records, turntablism… When the drum sampler was invented, music specifically made for breakdancing popped up. On one hand, there is a much heavier, faster, bass-driven type of **Electro** called **Freestyle**, with less subtle and catchier synthesizer melodies accompanied by powerful raps. **Freestyle** is also sometimes referred to as **Electro Breakdance**.

On the other hand, new heavy and melodic instrumental **Funk** records with lots of breaks and drum samples were being released for all the “b-boys” and “fly girls” to dance to. This **Breakdance** is quite different from **Freestyle**, but both are strongly tied together in the same subculture. The difference between **Breakdance** and **Nu Funk** or **Deep Funk** can be marginal, but **Breakdance** is true **Breakbeat**: it uses more pronounced breaks and more percussion while implementing Hip-Hop elements such as scratching, sampling (often Latin or orchestral in nature) and electronic sounds.

However, **Freestyle** also has a different meaning (but somewhat related) when it is used to describe Electro-influenced **Disco**, like Joyce Sims’ “Lifetime Love” for example. This type of **Freestyle**, heavily influenced by the TR-808 drum computer, is synonymous with “Electrodance” and a forefather to **Eurodance**.

### [1988] Florida Breaks (& Funky Breaks)
**Breakbeat** kicked off as a style on its own with **Florida Breaks**. No **Rap** lyrics, no breakdancing, almost no Hip-Hop whatsoever; simply one long break digitally looped over and over. As one could expect at its place of birth, the music is sunny and uptempo, meant to mix together as one endless party breakbeat aimed at clubs. **Florida Breaks** is based on **Electro**, yet with stronger basslines. Just as the hard four-to-the-floor beat of **Chicago House** and **Detroit Techno** created a nightlife shockwave, so did the unheard of electronic breakbeat of **Florida Breaks**. With a strong subculture of excessive partying and drug abuse, **Florida Breaks** or **Electro Breaks** can be described as “the Rave of Hip-Hop”. Although the first records can be traced back to 1987-’88, the **Florida Breaks** scene breaks loose around 1993-’94.

Eventually other artists picked up this mostly DJ-music, got rid of the “Electro”-effects, and focused on the breaks while adding lyrics. Thus **Breakbeat** gradually evolved from spontaneous mixing (**Old Skool Rap**) to DJ-sets and finally professional productions with albums and performances (**Funky Breaks**, and later **Big Beat**). **Funky Breaks**, sometimes also used as a synonym for **Florida breaks**, uses more retro **Funk** and less **Electro** elements and forms the bridge between **Florida Breaks** and **Big Beat**.

### [1992] Trip Hop
**Trip Hop** started off within Bristol’s multicultural Hip-Hop scene where members of Massive Attack tried to bring **Rap** music to a larger (read: white and European) audience. Their early experiments with **Breakbeat** were known as “Bristol Breaks or Beats”. Because Bristol also had a significant Jamaican population and (like many British cities) a history of **Post-Punk**, **Trip Hop** became an interesting and meticulously crafted blend of styles: part **Rock**, part **Rap**, part **Ambient**, part **Jamaican** (**Reggae**, but even more importantly: **Dub**).

Around the same time in the U.S., DJ Shadow started to experiment with slower forms of **Breakbeat** while adding out-of-the-box acoustic samples: strings, guitars, piano. Although the American and British forms of **Trip Hop** evolved from different paths, the end result was the same: downtempo **Breakbeat** with minimal instrumentation but often dramatic and/or melancholic. **Dub**-effects and loops are also very common.

**Trip Hop** creates a surreal and moody dream world (hence its name: trippy Hip-Hop) but with just the right amount of “punch” to prevent becoming background music. This makes **Trip Hop** very popular among marihuana users, but it also allowed a large mainstream breakthrough, especially when vocals are added. It could’ve been just a small and insignificant **Ambient Breakbeat** subgenre, but **Trip Hop** wouldn’t settle for mediocre popularity. After both *Massive Attack’s* and *DJ Shadow’s* breakthrough, more artists jumped on the bandwagon with successful results.

### [1994] Chemical Breaks & Big Beat
The perfect soundtrack for a nocturnal technoir or urban noir film or game, stacked with high-paced action and adrenaline: that is **Chemical Breaks** or Beats. With never-ending drum rolls and constant rhythmic builds & drops, the music feels like a rollercoaster of complex breakbeats, often flavored with acid-sounds. **Chemical Breaks** is rarely played at parties or clubs, because it is deemed more suitable for soundtracks and because it quickly got replaced by the overlapping Big Beat.

**Chemical Breaks**, sometimes referred to as “Rave ‘n’ Roll”, was addictive for many composers, who fused it with a lot of other genres, especially **Rock**. The use of mid-frequency **Rock** riffs and eclectic silly samples changed **Chemical Breaks** into a new genre: **Big Beat**, named after its pronounced, heavy breaks. **Big Beat** made **Breakbeat** burst into mainstream, as it was accessible, fun, loud, catchy and influenced by diverse genres: **Funk** grooves, **Acid House** synths, and Madchester riffs. Pretty soon, **Big Beat** artists became headliners for huge stages, Rave’n’rock’n’rolling everyone away. The mainstream success and eclectic nature of **Big Beat** ensured a heavy backlash by more purist producers, though the genre was a backlash itself, against the exaggerated seriousness of “intelligent” **Techno** label Warp and consorts.

### [1998] Nu Skool Breaks
Like almost all Dance super-genres, **Breakbeat** has a back-and-forth polarity of purism versus eclecticism, old skool versus new skool, back (to the roots) versus further (crossing over). **Nu (Skool) Breaks** is a misleading term however, as it attempts to keep the old skool spirit alive after the **Big Beat** explosion. **Big Beat** took another approach from the repetitive, driven dance beats found in **Chemical/Acid/Funky/Florida** breaks (the old skool). Eventually **Breakbeat** sounded more like **Rock** than Dance. **Nu-Skool** wanted to turn the tide as a fast (around 135bpm or more), instrumental, pulsing club beat. The **Nu-Skool **differs from the old one in the use of computer-generated, perfected modern sounds and a subsonic, booming bass, influenced by **Drum ‘n’ Bass**. **Nu Skool Breaks** might seem a lot like a sort of slowed-down **Jungle** (as they both originated in London), being equally dark and menacing. Elements of **Techno** and **Electro** might be traceable as well.

Inspired by **Progressive House**, some **Nu Skool Breaks** artists started to create a more driven, atmospheric and lighter sound, known as **Progressive Breaks**. Alongside **Progressive Breaks** (which is regarded as a subgenre, not something new), more and more **Big Beat** artists start to cooperate with **Nu Skool** artists to revitalize their sound.

### [1999] Broken Beats
**Broken Beats** (or **Beat or Breaks**) is one of those “superfusion” genres, combining all possible influences into a jack-of-all-trades. The main ingredients here are **House**, **Techno**, **Jungle**, **Soul** and lots of **Jazz**, resulting in a softer, downtempo type of **Breakbeat**. Breakbeat-influenced types of **Jazz** like **Acid Jazz** and **Nu-Jazz**, are closely related (and also fusions like **Broken Beats**) but they are not **Breakbeat** at their core. In **Broken Beats**, this core is carefully assembled from cut (broken) beats. This process occurs entirely with the help of the computer, resulting in very complex, syncopated rhythms, often glitchy. In this manner, the “broken” aspect becomes highlighted. Accentuated snares further enhance the stuttering percussion of this genre. Vocals often appear in a soulful way, making it hard to classify **Broken Beats** into one super-genre. The rest of the music can be completed à la carte. The fact whether the artist has more of a **D’n’B**, **R&B**, **House**, or **Jazz** background, will decide which direction it will go. Many **Broken Beats** producers have a **Drum ‘n’ Bass** background however, and were in search of a new, experimental answer to deal with **D’n’B** in the 21st century, inspired by 2-Step. **Broken Beats** is sometimes also referred to as “West London”, or “BRUK” (Broken Beats UK) where the genre originated.

### [2005] Glitchhop & wonky
**Glitch Hop** is an obscure but atmospheric genre, only retrieved in the part of a repertoire of experimental Breakbeat/Hip-Hop artists who combine Glitch noises and techniques with breakbeats. At the end of the nillies, **Glitch Hop** merged with a number of genres (such as **Crunk**) into a much larger style that can be described as a sort of instrumental ambient glitch breakbeat, called **Wonky**. Apart from **Dubstep**-influenced beats, the main characteristic of **Wonky** are its heavily distorted mid-frequency synthlines (both bass and melody) that seem to be broken (a typical Glitch thing) by their unstable or “wonky” sound. The wonky sound is partly influenced by ketamine, which was a rather popular recreational drug at the end of the nillies. Ketamine’s effect on body moving and dancing along with its psychedelic nature, explains a great deal of the rather strange sound of **Wonky**.

**Wonky** (aka **Purple Sound**) and **Glitch Hop** can be regarded as the “IDM” of **Rap**; experimenting with unexpected sounds, interrupts and unconventional techniques. Many Wonky artists also reside at Warp Records, the principal IDM label. **Wonky** has some overlapping with **Post-Dubstep** and forms therefore another bridge between **Rap** and **UK Garage** or **Drum ‘n’ Bass**, next to **Trapstep**. Lately these super-genres have become more intertwined leading to some interesting results.

### [2012] EDM Trap / Trapstep
**Trap** evolves strongly: it crosses so much over into electronic dance music that there is barely anything Hip-Hop left. It also becomes faster, reaching a bpm of 140, outside of the normal Rap spectrum. This new type of **Breakbeat** proves so successful that a new, instrumental EDM genre emerges. Listening to the same name, it can be hard to separate these two genres (**Trap Rap** and the newer **EDM Trap**, which is also referred to as **Trapstep** because of the fusion with **Dubstep**). The difference between these two “traps” is large though. **Trapstep** uses only electronic (mainly computer-based) sounds, no turntables, and it has no rap lyrics or **R&B** samples. **Trapstep** is dancefloor DJ music, not **Rap** music. Due to the absence of lyrics, **Trapstep** focuses a lot more on the drop: the energy is strongly tangible in the build-up, which is often prolongued. The drop itself is as climatic as possible and consists of very deep synth basslines.

It’s striking that once again **Hip-Hop** culture reinvigorates Dance music with a whole new style. **Trap** becomes so popular that it merges with other genres that were already focused around the drop. **Trap** fuses with **Electro House** and **Moombahton** into **Trap House** and **Trap-ah-ton** respectively. All these syncopated “drop genres” have become one big melting pot after 2013, making the musical future of EDM even harder to predict.
