## Classic Rock / Golden Age Rock
- [[1963] (Mersey) Beat/British Invasion](#1963-Mersey-BeatBritish-Invasion)
- [1964] British Blues & Blues Rock
- [[1965] Folk Rock](#1965-Folk-Rock)
- [[1965] Psychedelic Rock/Acid Rock & Psychedelia](#1965-Psychedelic-RockAcid-Rock--Psychedelia)
- [[1968] Hardrock](#1968-Hardrock)
- [[1969] Progressive Rock, Art-Rock & Symphonic Rock](#1969-Progressive-Rock-Art-Rock--Symphonic-Rock)
- [[1970] Krautrock](../master/industrial.md#1970-krautrock)
- [[1971] Glam Rock/Glitter Rock/Shock Rock](#1971-Glam-RockGlitter RockShock-Rock)
- [[1971] Southern Rock](#1971-Southern-Rock)
- [[1974] Heartland Rock & A.O.R. (Adult Oriented Rock)](#1974-Heartland-Rock--AOR-Adult-Oriented-Rock)

The Golden Age of **Rock** or **Classic Rock** are terms not frequently used, but there is no debate about their meaning. **Rock** completely erupts in an unimaginable way in the sixties, which was so dominant that it still is considered by many music journalists as the most important popular music genre. Since this age, many music magazines, festivals, and books mention the adjective **“Rock”** as a portmanteau for all popular music. A lot of artists are still performing this very day and have become true **Rock** legends. In fact, the only ones that have stopped to do so are those who are dead. A proof of the passion these artists have for their music and the justification of the term “Golden Age”.

A large concurrence of events lies at the core of **Classic Rock’s** revolution. The aftershock of World War II starts to fade since 1958 and a long period of prosperity ensues. A believe in a better future, i.e. a world of peace and happiness, forms the blueprints of a strong countercultural hippie movement. Amphetamines (extensively used during WWII) became cheaper, more popular, more produced and remained legal until 1971. Amphetamines not only shaped **Rock ‘n’ Roll** but all **Rock** into the most energetic music at the time, whereas the popularity of psychedelic drugs led to experimenting and genre differentiation. The contraceptive pill, invented in 1960, was one of the greatest pivotal moments of female emancipation of all time. In that same year, the British government relinquished the army service for boys. In one lucky strike, both the (British) female and male youth was liberated. Needless to say, the culmination of all these events resulted in a decade-long party, of which no-one wanted to experience the hangover.

Because of these historic events, most **Classic Rock** genres originated in the UK, but **Rock** quickly became hugely popular across the ocean. Legendary **Rock** neighborhoods of joy and libertinism, such as the Height Ashbury District, San Francisco, or Soho, London, proved sublime spawning pools for talent. In the UK, pirate radios start playing **Rock** music since 1964. Immediately, a notion of “rebelliousness” was identified with the music. In 1967 the government shuts down these radio stations, causing the gap between **Pop** and **Rock** to widen (radio vs live / mainstream vs alternative).

**Classic Rock** further incorporates elements from **Blues** and **R&B** and the universal blueprint for **Rock** takes hold. The music becomes more structured with a sequential pattern (verse-chorus-verse-chorus-break/solo-chorus), although the complete opposite was also true (**Prog Rock** and experimental **Acid Rock**, which could lack any sort of structure).

Typical about the Golden Age of **Rock** is the arrival of multi-tracking recording studios. Multi-tracking allows the composer to record different parts of the song and edit them separately. First there were only three tracks, soon four, then eight, and now 24+ is the standard. With multi-tracking one could also record, play and record again (overdubbing) to create a richer or “thicker” sound. Many other techniques suddenly became possible: time alteration, cutting, looping, echo, leslie speakers, etc. During the era of **Classic Rock**, all these pioneering techniques allowed the creation of music that could not be played live and albums became much more precious than before. They revealed intriguing, out-of-this-world music with experimental (often psychedelic) sounds, further adding to the Rock mania that was already taking place. Famous producers like George Martin, Brian Wilson and Phil Spector were extremely fast in unraveling all the secrets multi-tracking could unfold.

Even more so than in another super-genre, **Classic Rock** artists cannot be casted within one genre. In this highly experimental age, most artists show work in different genres on the same album. Crossovers from **Blues** (**Blues Rock**) to **Metal** (**Classic Metal**) make a neat partition of **Classic Rock** artists largely pointless.

### [1963] (Mersey) Beat/British Invasion
Where the early London **Rock** scene was more concerned with **Blues**, the city of Liverpool took interest in cleverly produced music (jukebox music) such as **Motown**. Because Liverpool was a large harbor city frequented by ocean liners, the local music scene was more connected to American **R&B** than most British towns. After a while, local vocal groups (young eager **Rock** bands) started creating a new type of **Rock** with a strong backbeat rhythm and polyphonic vocals: a mix of **Motown** & **R’n’R**. As a result, their songs were sometimes soft and poppy with strings and obvious **Soul** influences, and at other times very uptempo and swinging.

**Mersey Beat** (called after the river Mersey in Liverpool) or simply ‘Beat’ was the great second revolution of Rock. Most noteworthy are *The Beatles*, who won the hearts of every teen in the UK and America, and who started out as a seemingly upright boysband but later revolutionized sound recording. Inspired by their huge success - a true mania - many British **Mersey Beat** bands took the journey across the ocean to invade America and become **Rock** stars, though few actually succeeded. This phenomenon and the genre itself, is since known as the British Invasion (though **British Blues Rock** was also a part of this invasion).

A particular subcultural phenomenon closely related to **Mersey Beat**, is the British Mod scene of the fifties and the sixties. Young rebellious biker boys were united in their stance against conformist **Rock** and preferred a blend of sped up **Rock ‘n’ Roll** and **Motown. This eventually led to **Beat Music** (aka **Merseybeat**) and later to the **New Romantics** and even **Britpop**. With their speakers always on max volume and a healthy diet of pep pills, they were the vanguard of a new era of **Rock** – a Golden Age of guitars and soundwaves.

### [1965] Folk Rock
The British Invasion casted a shockwave throughout music industry and was practically impossible to ignore in the UK. Even the secluded folk communities took an interest in the strong backbeat and catchy guitar hooks. Pioneering band the Byrds initiated this evolution, starting out as a pure **Folk** band but dragging along many others in a real **Folk Rock** hype. By signing up with record labels (and thus going the “commercial” path) the (protest) messages and reflective stories of **Folk Rock** artists could reach a much larger audience than before. An appealing thought for artists who believed in the importance of story over sound. This came at the expense of experimentation: the songs were pretty conventional and simple. On top of that, an idealistic but too naïve world view didn’t help either to win over a large amount of fans who weren’t keen on this new direction towards Rock.

**Folk Rock** differs from the previous **Folk Revivals** in the use of electric, 12-string guitars and vocal harmonies in bands. There is a significant amount of overlap with **Country Rock**, as both genres are crossovers from acoustic guitar genres into electric guitar **Rock**.

### [1965] Psychedelic Rock/Acid Rock & Psychedelia
The sixties marked a new age of hope, reconstruction, love and peace after the aftershocks of World War II. A huge spiritual hippie subculture flourished in many places, especially those with a large student population. The principal among them was the famous Height Ashbury district in San Francisco, where accordingly people wore “flowers in their hair”. These young hippies were inspired by eastern cultures and music (particularly the works of Indian Raga musician Ravi Shankar), the structure and experimental nature of **Free Jazz**, and (of course) countless psychedelic drugs. Especially LSD with its vivid and colorful hallucinations slowly conquered their daily lives. LSD (or acid) was strongly promoted by alternative psychologists and epistemological gurus like *Timothy Leary* and *Aldous Huxley*.

All these different inspirations were set loose upon the popular college music of the time: **Folk Revival**, **Mersey Beat**, and mostly **Garage Rock**, to create freeform, exotic **Rock** music with psychedelic sound effects. The stereotypical warm and fuzzy sound of Hammond organs is no stranger to **Psychedelic (or Psy) Rock** as well. Because of its highly experimental nature and drug-and-peace-friendly appeal, many subgenres saw the light and were conjoined under the tag “Psychedelia”. Multiple revivals in the coming decades, such as the Paisley Underground and Neo-Psychedelia, are proof of the vastness and popularity of this genre. Within the large treasure chest of Psychedelia, countless rare gems can be found, made by a flood of unknown artists, sometimes even impossible to find on the internet.

The power of the countercultural movement and **Psychedelic Rock** was strongly felt in a large social gathering in 1967, known as the (first) “Summer of Love”, but the height came in the form of Woodstock in 1969: one of the largest festivals of all time and a symbol of connection in mind and spirit between all countercultural attendees, but also a turning point for **Rock** music in general. The hippie tidal wave became too big, and finally broke.

### [1968] Hardrock
In the UK, many music genres have been restyled into a rougher, “British” version of themselves. The same happened with **Blues Rock** in the late sixties, which got restyled into **Hard Rock**. This happened simultaneously with the shutdown of UK’s pirate radios of the sixties. Subsidized radio stations after this closure preferred a palette of **Pop Rock** and **Soft Rock** and created a hiatus for heavier, more alternative music. **Hard Rock** filled that gap with a louder and faster kind of **Blues Rock** / **Acid Rock** and is therefore the missing link between these genres and **Heavy Metal**. The genre quickly caught on with the masses. After all, it was the first “heavy” music genre to exist or certainly the heaviest at this time.

**Hard Rock** uses the same instrument set-up as basic **Classic Rock** but with more distortion on the guitars and simple song structures. **Hard Rock** also introduced one of the most quintessential **Rock** elements: the “Riff”. Riffs are short unique melodies, often repetitive and a recognizable trademark of many **Rock** anthems.

Bursting with testosterone, **Hard Rock** is a macho thing, regardless if you’re a biker, leather-clad **Rock** star, or simply part of the rebel outlaw-subculture. The lyrical content often dealt with these lifestyles, talking about dark, criminal or macho topics. A new direction of music was born, so large and prominent that it’s hard to say which **Metal**, **Industrial** or modern **Rock** genre wasn’t influenced by it.

### [1969] Progressive Rock, Art-Rock & Symphonic Rock
The difference between **Art Rock** and **Symphonic Rock** is pretty straightforward (more ‘artsy’ versus more classical elements), but their adjectives can be applied to **Progressive Rock** as well. Though technically different, we will treat these three genres as one and the same for the sake of conciseness.

By the mid sixties the new 33rpm long-play records had pushed away the older 78rpm records, allowing for more playtime on one record. Thus shifted the focus from hit singles to elaborate concept albums, in which also longer songs were possible. Longer songs meant more opportunity to experiment with passages, structure and song progression (hence the genre name). The (modest) freeform and crossover of **Acid Rock** inspired some “progressive artists” to experiment as well, but more towards classical music than world music. Softer, longer, and intricate songs were the result, with lots of tempo changes and special instruments (like a mellotron). It was contemplative, difficult to write music and not really meant for live performances, but to be mastered to perfection on vinyl as the Holy Grail for the intellectual audiophile. Because during the sixties, another key event in music history occurred that explains **Prog Rock’s** appeal: the appearance of stereo headphones and hi-fidelity speakers and home amplifiers. Stereo becomes the norm instead of mono and music listening turns into an uncanny sensation through technology that still delivers excellent sound quality by today’s standards.

Although numerous artists jumped on the bandwagon, especially in Italy, France and Germany, only few attained public fame. In the late seventies and early eighties, an emotional Prog(ressive) Revival aka **Neo-Prog** (with the band *Marillion* as principal exponent) further nurtured the undying interest of selective fans. The most important, experimental and peculiar **Prog Rock** subgenre is probably “Zeuhl”, that uses Opera and synth influences with chaotic percussion to create a fantasy-loaded dream world where anything is possible.

### [1971] Glam Rock / Glitter Rock / Shock Rock
The implosion of the flower power age led to a shift of focus towards individualism and with some artists to a cult of personality. One important contributor to this change is the introduction of popular music onto television. At first with broadcasted performances, music programs and in the eighties even with specialized music channels and video clips. This was strongly felt in the world of **Rock** where **Hard Rock** became less about auditory and more about the visual. Certain **Rock** artists grasped the opportunity of TV to stand out and get noticed. Either by shocking audiences with sexual or provocative acts (**Shock Rock**) or by conceiving eccentric alter egos through make-up and fashion (**Glam/Glitter Rock**). Ironically the sound was far from shocking, it was glamorous. **Glam Rock’s** style could range from **Singer/Songwriter** to **Prog Rock** or even **Hard Rock**, but often with piano melodies. Conceptual video clips gave the genre appeal in intellectual circles (something its **Metal** successor **“Glam Metal”** lost) and increased the concept of mystery and the bizarre. **Glam Rock** is about fame. Androgynous singers and electronic influences frightened traditional **Rock** enthusiasts who started forming a large countermovement in “Roots Rock”. **Glam Rock** overlaps with its successor, **Proto Punk**, which would transfer the glam universe of excess and eccentricity to **Punk Rock**.

### [1971] Southern Rock
When a nation loses a war, often a deep urge arises to reestablish its pride and express its identity. **Southern Rock** is another example of many styles typical for the southern states of the US and arguably the one that stresses most the will of pride, glory and freedom. This fusion genre is patriotic to the bone: southern **American Blues** (Delta) meets southern **American Country** (Outlaw) meets **American Rock** (Rock ‘n’ Roll). After a period of experimenting and psychedelic **Rock**, the time for back to the roots **Rock** music was at hand. **Southern Rock** is distinguishable by being raw and loud. It is the celebration and adoration of electric (Blues slide) guitars by having multiple lead guitars playing (often improvised) solos whenever they’re not used for some heavy boogie jamming. In conclusion: **Southern Rock** is either a gentle **Country** balled with a touch of **Blues Rock** or a freight train rollercoaster looping and spinning off its tracks until the shaking boogie rhythm puts it back on again for another ride. In the 21st century, a new wave of **Southern Rock** artists comes on the scene such as the *Kings of Leon* and *the Black Crowes*.

### [1974] Heartland Rock & A.O.R. (Adult Oriented Rock)
When people think about Rock of the seventies, it’s usually not **Hard Rock** or **Glam Rock**, but the antagonistic **“A.O.R.”** short for **Adult Oriented Rock** (and not album oriented rock as sometimes described). **A.O.R** provided the counterweight for loud, sharp, in-your-face **Rock** within more alternative and “mature” circles, hence its name (though many adults were also college students in the beginning). The contrast with **Hard Rock** increased, leading to the antonym **Soft Rock.** **A.O.R**. has many synonyms such as **American Rock**, **Arena Rock**, **Stadium Rock**, **Late Hard Rock** and **Pomp Rock**. These names already show the massive popularity of the genre and the allegedly pompousness of many acts. Strongly reminiscent of **Prog Rock**, **A.O.R.** bands focused on the album as a whole (singles were less important) and they were filled with long and varying songs.** A.O.R** is a lot more catchy and accessible than **Prog Rock** (though experimentation is not out of the question). The main reason for **A.O.R.’s** success does not lie in its glossy production or the combination of dramatic guitar chords with simple drum patterns. Though this certainly helped, its success lies in a twisted nostalgia of the free spirit of the sixties, and a strong desire to forget all negative things of the early seventies: Vietnam, Watergate and the Iran War. **A.O.R.** is a Flower Power Fata Morgana.

**Heartland Rock** can be seen as a subgenre of **A.O.R**. This music genre emerged in 1979 and quickly gained momentum as it was made for the everyday blue collar hard-working American. The name refers to the “Heartland” of America, which are the Midwestern states of the U.S.
