## Downtempo/Ambient
- [[1948] Musique Concrète](#1948-Musique-Concrète)
- [[1953] Lounge/Exotica/Space Age Pop](#1953-LoungeExoticaSpace-Age-Pop)
- [[1959] Minimalism](#1959-Minimalism)
- [[1962] Muzak/Elevator Music](#[1962-MuzakElevator-Music)
- [[1972] Synth/Electronica](#1972-SynthElectronica)
- [[1973] Ambient](#1973-Ambient)
- [[1978] Bit Music/Chiptune](1978-Bit-MusicChiptune)
- [[1979] New Age](#1979-New-Age)
- [1984] Dark Ambient/Dark Industrial
- [[1989] Ambient House/Chill-out](#1989-Ambient-HouseChill-out)
- [1992] Ambient Techno & IDM(Intelligent Dance Music)
- [1992] Trip-Hop
- [[1995] Ambient Breaks & Illbient](#1995-AmbientBreaks--Illbient)
- [[1998] Glitch/Click'n'Cuts](#1998-GlitchClicknCuts)
- [[2003] Digital Minimalism/Lowercase](#2003-Digital-MinimalismLowercase)
- [2006] Minimal Wave/Synth & Minimal Industrial (revival)
- [[2012] Synthwave&Vaporwave](#2012-SynthwaveVaporwave)

**Downtempo** is a collection of primarily electronic music with an average tempo lower than usual (below 110 bpm), hence its name. Because of such a low tempo, the music is generally not meant for dancing and seldom live performed. **Downtempo** is music to listen to in a natural (read: non-musical) environment. **Downtempo** music is often featured in film soundtracks, on albums for home listening, in public places, or… at the university. Early **Downtempo** evolved out of academic experiments with the first electronic music instruments. This can even be traced back to the 1920s, when the very first electronic sound was produced, thanks to Léon Theremin and his homonymous instrument. To these researchers, **Downtempo** was not particularly slow. Only many decades later, after the arrival of much faster electronic dance genres, was the term “Downtempo” applied to this music. Sometimes **Downtempo** is simply referred to as “Electronic” as opposed to (Electronic) Dance (Music).

**Downtempo** puts greater emphasis on sounds and sound experimentation than most super-genres. The whole history of **Downtempo** has been about exploring and discovering new techniques and sounds, and gently expanding on its discoveries. **Downtempo** does not choose between acoustic or electronic, it includes whatever it can to produce the perfect sound.

The most important aspect of **Downtempo** however, is a radically different approach on music in general. Instead of working with (serial) song structure, most songs are non-serial: they evolve slowly and gradually by repetition instead of structured patterns. Within this seamlessly endless repetition, the mind is being taken on a transcendental journey. With no pattern, no point of orientation, there is no more song, only music. Downtempo asks questions about what music is, instead of being an answer like other genres. The unique classical works of Claude Débussy have been an important influence on much of Downtempo’s music, but unconventional world musicians experimenting with structure and sound left their mark as well.

“Ambient”, from the Latin “ambire” or “to surround”, is a surrounding music genre emerging in the seventies that was so influential to other (electronic) music that it became a pars pro toto for the whole group of **Downtempo** genres. Because once again, Ambient raises an important question: should music be noticeable and autonomous or a barely indistinguishable and integrated part of everyday life?

**Downtempo** has a complex and unique genealogy. The overall genre structure is very linear due to a slow and extensive evolution, but there are no less than five music groups discernable. Groups with significant autonomy, but also a high degree of overlapping due to **Downtempo’s** experimental nature:

1.  The Electronic Avant-Garde: responsible for laying the foundations of all electronic music and thus almost half of all popular music genres. This includes **Musique Concrète**, **Minimalism**, and their later subgenres: **Sound Collage** and **Neo-Minimalism**.
2.  The large family of Easy-Listening, including **Lounge**: sometimes considered a super-genre on its own. Easy-Listening is a term reserved for gentle background music with a variety of origins, mostly exotic or Jazzy.
3.  Progressive Electronic: the interesting crossroads between **Progressive Rock** and electronic music at a time where genre was meaningless and eventually leading to Ambient, the principal Downtempo genre.
4.  Ambient Dance: the combination of Ambient with any other EDM genre such as: Ambient Techno, Ambient Breakbeat, Ambient House and so on. Sometimes referred to as **Chill-Out** or **Downbeat**, although the former is confusingly also used for **Loungetronica**.
5.  **Synth**: the collection of music that is entirely or dominantly synthesizer based, with pronounced synth melodies and basslines, but also with a high degree of rhythm and percussion compared to Electronic Avant-Garde or Progressive Electronic.

### [1948] Musique Concrète
The origin of all electronic music already started in the forties: classical composers (mostly European) experimented in advanced sound studios with the new possibilities of magnetic tape. By recording, replaying, looping, multi-tracking, reserving, sound altering and delaying they were able to create long and diverse compositions without the need for live instruments. Thus the first artificially created music was born. Musique Concrète has no origin, no parent genre; it evolves directly out of the very first electro-acoustic music, such as Theremin performances.

The avant-avant-garde composers of Musique Concrète saw themselves more than academic researchers. To them, this music was more real (concrete) than any other. Music played by live instruments was something abstract, fleeting. Once you heard it, it was gone. Their music wasn’t; It was recorded and stored, saved for eternity, and capable of being paused, rewinded, re-listened and more. In 1975, a second wave of Musique Concrète (Sound Collage or Tape Music) took place, sampling all sounds into soundscapes with advanced recorders.

### [1953] Lounge/Exotica/Space Age Pop
Lounge is the term for background music in the fifties and sixties at bars, social places, and of course hotel lounges. It’s music to make people comfortable and relaxed without drawing too much attention to itself. The first wave of Lounge (aka pure or acoustic Lounge) is a loose collection of related subgenres, often based on the template of Swing: Space Age Pop (the principal Lounge genre, named after the space age aka the fifties and with many Latin Jazz influences), Exotica (similar, but with more Hawaiian, Caribbean, or Oceanian influences), Mambo, Latin Jazz, and Bossa Nova. All these genres are connected by their warm, exotic, and cozy feel. Combined with Muzak and New Age, Lounge is also known as Easy-Listening, though the use of this term as a genre is contested. The difference between **Spage Age Pop** and **Exotica** is minimal. Both genres stir up a picture of another place: an exotic (retro) dreamworld to take the listener on holiday while relaxing.

In the sixties, **Lounge** gets annihilated by the success of **Rock** and it would take three decades to get back on its feet. Bands *Saint Etienne*, *Combustible Edison*, and *Pizzicato Five* revived acoustic Lounge in the nineties, but their success was little compared to the real second wave of Lounge taking place at the same time. In this wave, Jazz was no longer used but replaced by soft, slow, electronic music (especially **Ambient** was a big influence) and the word “Lounge” got a new meaning. **Electronic Lounge** or **Loungetronica** as it is called, is not listed as a separate genre but divided on the Carta into its distinctive subgenres: **Nu-Jazz**, **Trip Hop**, **Broken Beats**, **Ambient House**, and **Jazzstep**. The abundant **Lounge** compilation albums available feature a variety of these genres, and often include songs that cross over to one of the other genres. This has created the illusion that electronic Lounge is a real separate genre. Though when it comes to conveying these otherwise hard-to-find tracks into your living room, the end justifies the means.

### [1959] Minimalism
At the end of the fifties, the very first synthesizer was invented. It was a huge and expensive machine (not like the commercial synthesizers released around 1969) that could only be used by academic researchers. A handful of European composers, inspired by **Musique Concrète**, had the chance to work with it and immediately saw this as a golden opportunity to defy all formal musical conventions. This electronic avant-garde (regarded by many artists today as genial grandmasters) created spacey, interwoven compositions with lots of silence and long notes. There was no rhythm or pattern to be found, it was non-serial by definition. One could think that this would bother the listener, but thanks to its slow tempo and soothing, space- or underwater-like sounds, Minimalistic music is very gentle to the ear. These “droning” sounds make **Minimalism** the very first genre of drone music.

Minimalists drew cues from the most outlying corners of the musical universe: melodies from the Middle East, mathematical structure from eastern cultures, hallucinogenic drugs and experimental classical music such as Claude Débussy. They used western instruments and technology on eastern music structure and theory – the result was one of the most influential electronic music genres of all time.

A brief backlash by female vocalists known as Voice Music, ensued **Minimalism**. These artists renounced what they regarded as exorbitantly cold, machined, rational, technical and masculine music. Their fear that the world of music would change into a field where mathematicians pulled the strings and emotion was banned, (luckily) turned out to be unjust.

### [1962] Muzak/Elevator Music
**Muzak** mainly consists of simple, lightweight, jazzy melodies with minimal bass or percussion. Since its invention, it has been frequently used as background music for elevators, airports, swimming pools, shopping malls or any other public place where people might get uncomfortable. Because in a way, **Muzak** can be seen as a preserver of mental wellbeing; “new” music for these new, strange public places, which didn’t exist before the late fifties (Foucault’s heterotopias). Though **Muzak** itself already existed since the twenties as so called “Furniture Music”, it wasn’t until the early sixties that it broke through. The name **Muzak** came actually from a company specialized in making taped background music, which they sold to public venues in the sixties and particularly to companies as a tool to motivate their workforce. Early **Muzak** was strongly influenced by the works of French composer Erik Satie, who inspired the whole of avant-garde Downtempo with his repetitive and minimal arrangements or piano works. By the early sixties, **Muzak** becomes also popular outside these constrained spheres.

The difference between the early Easy-Listening genres - **Muzak** and **Lounge** - is that **Lounge** is supposed to be intimate, warm and moody (to enhance a certain setting) where **Muzak** is extremely functional. It serves either to break any (awkward) silence and mask irritating background noises or to increase working productivity. After the sixties, **Muzak** became an extremely derogatory term for spineless, idle music. Labeling an artist’s work as “muzak” is considered the most feared coup de grace.

### [1972] Synth/Electronica
The term “Electronica” was given in the early nineties to a collection of album and single oriented EDM genres with high popularity (Big Beat, IDM, Ambient Breaks and Ambient House) by the American press. Unfortunately, this collection was more artificial than anything else, and became soon a despised genre name by music connoisseurs. It is however also used, slightly more appropriate, for one of the earliest electronic genres: **Synth**.

At the end of the sixties, a single affordable electronic music instrument was suddenly released on the market that was able to do anything! Melody, rhythm, beats, all-in-one: it was all possible with the use of the synthesizer. The possibilities of the first synthesizers were not endless however, and some presets were more liked than others. This fact combined with the eagerness of unknown DIY-composers resulted in an avalanche of similar electronic tunes: strong, catchy melodies (often four simple chords), alternated by spacey sound effects (e.g. flying saucers) and accompanied by synth strings or moody bass chords, either without beat or with the echoing thunder of built-in drum computers.

In the eighties, this so called “Electronica” (better known as synthesizer music or simply Synth) saw a small revival as the bass-driven and hollow sounding subgenre **Darksynth** or **Horrorsynth**, the soundtrack for all neon-filled sci-fi and technology horror films. Most of **Synth** was part of the so called subgenre “Spacesynth”: music for science fiction films or filled with space-like sounds. **Synth** became the favorite music for almost any late seventies and early eighties television and film theme, as it was a fairly new and unexpected sound that presented a challenge to be used for anything else.

### [1973] Ambient
Instead of the formal synthesizer music of **Synth**, some artists returned to the roots of the **Minimalists** and their sound experiments. Even with basic, commercial synthesizers it was still possible to create something truly experimental, but the genre was actually an accident involving an acoustic instrument: *Brian Eno* coincidentally slowed down the arpeggio of a harp to the point of dissolution. And thus **Ambient** was born. The concept this time was different than in the old days: the music should no longer be an autonomous element, but an inseparable part of the environment. This was done by creating the most subtle, barely audible sounds possible with a very natural sound. The end result was a collage of environmental sounds, blending in with the surroundings of the listener. Contrary to **Muzak** or **Lounge**, this was not music for public places, but for the listener’s own personal interior - for private places - so one could completely space out. Artists from various backgrounds, such as **Progressive Rock** bands Yes and Genesis, as well as highly innovative soloists were attracted to the idea of music as form, music as space, and not as furniture or something concrete.

Ambient has extensive songs that are arguably the most progressive and impressionist of all music genres; very slowly and gradually the music changes in time while subtly and vaguely presenting images from another reality, like Ravel's “Bolero”. **Ambient**, **Synth/Electronica**, experimental **New Age** and more electronic types of **Prog Rock** share a great deal of overlapping. The philosophical concepts of these “Progressive Electronic” genres could be applied to many other ones as well, ranking them high as influential styles. In Germany, a very influential style of **Ambient**, known as the Berlin School, drew cues from Kraftwerk and laid the foundations for many **Downtempo** and **Synthpop** to come.

### [1978] Bit Music/Chiptune
With the arrival of early home computers and the first game consoles, a weird and particular kind of music was born: electronic music made for electronic games. Because of primitive chips and hardware, this music had to be small in data and was therefore by default minimalistic, lo-fi and consisting of recurring parts (loops). Often it was barely more than a catchy, high-frequency melody and a single rhythmic bass chord produced by a small sound chip (like the famous Tetris tune or Pacman sounds). The result is an extremely primitive sound, but that didn’t matter as early computers or arcade consoles had low-quality speakers anyways.

However, during the coming decades (and until this very day) countless artists were drawn to the sound and started to make their own game music - without games. At first Video Game Music (or VGM), better known as Bit Music, consisted primarily of two subgenres: very basic 8bit Music aka **Chiptune** (thus based on 8bit chips) and the slightly more advanced 16bit, which allowed for a richer and more layered sound, though still very rudimentary. One could have expected that the silliness would not stop there: pretty soon Bit Music merged with other genres such as Pop (Bit Pop) and even Hardcore Punk / Metal (Nintendocore). Although this genre might seem like a trivia not worth mentioning, the technology itself brought forth lots of other instruments and influenced other electronic music, while the amount of Bit Music artists is not to be underestimated.

### [1979] New Age
Two evolutions in the seventies laid the foundations for New Age. On one hand there was the introduction of nature sounds in **Ambient** music. Music did not need to repulse the environment but could actually be the voice of the environment – preferably a beautiful and escapist one, welling up vivid images of panoramic landscapes. On the other hand there was the rise of unprecedented heavy, macho music such as **Hard Rock** and **Heavy Metal**. Hereby, record stores saw a steady increase in demand in the opposite genre. With the spotlights on so much noise and teen oriented music, many (adult) people craved music with a sense of calmness.

**New Age** is often a careful balance of both acoustic and electronic instruments, which is quite unique among genres. Therefore it can please Rock/Pop and Electronic oriented fans at the same time. Though most **New Age** is instrumental, soothing voices are not uncommon. The overall tempo is very low (50-60 bpm) and transitions occur gradually and smooth. **New Age** caresses the mind with trembling timbres and stimulates the body with an inner rhythm.The whole purpose of the music is to relax, which is why some have mockingly called it “Hot Tub music”. But **New Age** is more than a music genre. The urge for nature-connected, tranquillizing music is intertwined with the birth of an affined spiritual subculture also known as **New Age**. Not long after, **New Age** became so popular that anything remotely related got tagged as **New Age**. There were (and are) **New Age** compilation albums, **New Age** record divisions, **New Age** merchandising , **New Age** homeopathy, and so on. The term became a cosmetics label, seized by capitalistic record labels and used for daily consumption.

### [1989] Ambient House/Chill-out
After a long and explorative journey of **Downtempo** music, the unsurprising fusion of Dance (early **House** at first) and **Ambient** was a fact. More so, it marked a turning point: a new era of Downtempo, where many types of Dance would be refurbished as an ambient genre. Indeed, after **Ambient House**, **Ambient Techno** and **Ambient Trance** emerged. In this era, the liberation of electronic sound reached its climax. No longer would sound be subject to rhythm, form, (non-)structure, melody or lyrics, but the face of the music: the gravitational center point. **Ambient House** is not meant to dance to, but neither to fade away into the background. It’s a natural, organic soundscape ideal for chill-out zones or club bars, hence its alias **Chill-Out**. In these zones, dancefloor refugees usually hung out in the early hours to deal with XTC’s harsh comedown effects: the detrimented mind in search for sensation and the hyperfatigued body aching but unable to rest. **Ambient House** brought solace as musical synesthesia: gentle, tactile sounds sensually touching the mind and mesmerizing melodies massaging mashed muscles, while a steady (subordinate) House beat provides the basic energy to sustain just a little while longer (though sometimes breakbeats are added). During the nineties, **Chill-Out** rapidly reached a fan base outside its druggy proving grounds, and received a wider definition encompassing all electronic easy-listening music (such as **Nu Jazz**, **Trip hop**, **Broken Beats**, Electronic New Age, **Nu Lounge**…).

### [1995] Ambient Breaks & Illbient
The powerful idea of slowed down **Breakbeat/Rap** pioneered by **Trip Hop**, led to more similar experiments: **Ambient Breaks**, with **Illbient** as the most deviant and noteworthy example. The experimental and innovative nature of Breakbeat synergizes with that of **Downtempo**, resulting in a highly fascinating electronic music genre. **Ambient Breaks** often crosses over to **Jazz**, which is called **Jazz Breaks**. Ninja Tune Records was principally responsible for spreading the genre with its legendary Jazz Brakes compilations and later with all kinds of **Ambient Breakbeat**. Ambient Breaks differs from Trip Hop (albeit sometimes minimally) as it is not Hip Hop music; it is the work of electronic music producers using various samples instead of a movement bridging remote subcultures into one.

When **Trip Hop** arrived in the US (specifically New York), conceptual artists got inspired by the sound but worked the other way around: they laid multiple layers of echoing ambient sounds on top of each other (influenced by **Dub**) and then added a breakbeat. These soundscapes are often eclectic noisescapes: dark, experimental, and drawing from different genres to create some sort of deep mysterious force. **Illbient** (= Ill Ambient, in its slang meaning: “this beat is ill”) is not drug music as one might suspect, but an artsy, contemplative soundtrack for an unwritten creepy or deeply psychological film.

### [1998] Glitch/Click'n'Cuts
**Glitch** is another example of the fact that anything can be music and probably almost any genre already exists. Inspired by the cracking and skittering sound of broken compact discs (“CD-glitches”), some DJ’s and sound producers in Germany and the UK went ahead to compose entire songs of faults, as if the songs were broken. Alongside glitches, often used techniques involve addition of the well-known broken disc “clicking sound” and skipping part of the track (laser jumping), which is simply referred to as “cuts”. Hence **Glitch’s** synonym name: **Clicks ‘n’ Cuts**. Although compact discs became less and less the staple of the music industry, the concept of a collage of unexpected error noises remained a strong influence on electronic music and could be seen as the third and arguably most real, most concrete wave of **Musique Concrète**. **Glitch** is more than just an out-of-the-box experiment – the genre symbolizes the art of failure, and raises philosophical questions about whether a song should be controlled and predetermined. The corresponding artwork is highly conceptual and almost an art exhibition on its own, further strengthening **Glitch’s** metaphysical dimension. Pure **Glitch** is a lesser familiar genre, but its fusions with other super-genres (**Glitch Hop**, **Glitch House**) are more common.

### [2003] Digital Minimalism/Lowercase
One of the final chapters in the history of **Downtempo** music marks a return to heavy experimentation, after an era of more or less predictable, popular **Ambient Dance**. As always inspired by the revered minimalists, a new wave of minimalists emerged, more extreme than before. The radical concept this time was to create silence instead of music (without actually creating silence, which wouldn’t present any challenge). In lengthy songs, long passages of silences are being highlighted by very quiet sounds. Not to break formality, but to enhance the contrast by heavily manipulated sounds (digitally this time) that would leap out of the silent abyss and catch the listener unaware. These can be ambient sounds, like Steve Roden’s experiments with folding paper, or something uncanny. Just like light cannot exist without shadows, so enable these sounds the awareness of silence. The combination of Lowercase’s song names with their track lengths exposes its radical concept, like “The Ant Moves the […] Carcass a Little Closer”, which lasts over 25 minutes. What we have here then, is without a doubt the least prominent of all music genres, and fittingly coined “Lowercase” (which actually shouldn’t be capitalized, something Glitch artists often do as well). Many Lowercase artists also create Glitch music and like to switch between styles to stay fresh and unexpected. Lowercase is music that is there and isn’t: it exists momentarily, illustrating the almost century-long struggle of electronic composers to make music a living thing.

### [2012] Synthwave/Vaporwave
In the midst of wonky, syncopated breakbeats, hyper-eclectic **Electropop** and indefinable **Witch House**, a beacon of familiarity (and some might say cheesiness) emerges. A swoop of mid eighties nostalgia – heavier than ever before – creates an escapism unparalleled in the world of popular music and with an exponentially growing amount of unknown internet artists.

On one hand, there is **Synthwave**: a revival of the obscure short-lived **Darksynth** that shies no cliché: the genre is integrated in an artwork of purple and pink neon, sport cars, Miami palm trees, 80’s cartoons, horror sci-fi and retro-futurism. Synthwave aka New Retro Wave is a timemachine to (Miami) 1984, with the same synthesizers and melodies from that era, producing the same kind of instrumental **Synth** music with crystal clear, resonating sounds.

On the other hand there is **Vaporwave**: a mixture of **Nu-Disco** and **Chillwave** that can be described as retro-futuristic Easy-Listening. It is also deeply embedded in similar retro-styled eighties artwork, but with more elements from nineties game/web/cartoon design. Vaporwave is especially popular in Japan, but like many recent genres, more part of an international internet culture (Synthwave as well) than a regional scene. Even more so, Vaporwave can be credited with the only metaphysically reactionary genre of the last decades: connotations of mass-consumerism and capitalistic technology spring automatically forth out of the eighties synth melodies, but get a satirical overhaul by sound manipulation (compression and slow-motion) inspired by early Muzak to create a corporate office/shopping mall background aesthetic. These sounds can either have a (Nu-)Disco, (Smooth) Jazz or (Electro-)Pop origin to further strengthen its parody on commercialism, just like the brand-based artist names. Many Vaporwave artists dwell in anonymity, and release unknown (often illegally sampled) music onto the masses, spurring the debate about music integrity and artist liberation versus intellectual property.
