## Drum'n'Bass
- [[1992] Old Skool Jungle & Old Skool Drum'n'Bass](#1992-Old-Skool-Jungle--Old-Skool-DrumnBass)
- [[1993] Darkcore & Darkstep](../master/hardcore.md#1993-Darkcore--Darkstep)
- [[1995] Hardstep & Techstep](#1995-Hardstep--Techstep)
- [[1996] Jump Up](#1996-Jump-Up)
- [[1997] Intelligent / Ambient Drum ‘N’ Bass & Jazzstep](#1997-Intelligent--Ambient Drum-N-Bass--Jazzstep)
- [[1997] UK Garage (2-Step & Speed Garage)](#1997-UK-Garage-2-Step--Speed-Garage)
- [[1997] Digital Hardcore & Breakcore](../master/hardcore.md#1997-Digital-Hardcore--Breakcore)
- [[1999] Neurofunk](#1999-Neurofunk)
- [[2000] Liquid Funk](#2000-Liquid-Funk)
- [[2001] Breakbeat Garage & Grime](#2001-Breakbeat-Garage--Grime)
- [[2003] Dubstep](#2003-Dubstep)
- [[2004] Bassline & UK funky](#2004-Bassline--UK-funky)
- [[2007] Post-Dubstep](#2007-Post-Dubstep)
- [[2009] Future Garage & Future Bass](#2009-Future-Garage--Future-Bass)

**Drum ‘n’ Bass** is arguably the deepest of all super-genres. It is a rolling and thundering sound of breakbeats and basslines, like the ominous distant rumble of a jungle stampede. (Modern) **Drum ‘n’ Bass** is too complex to create without the use of advanced music software, which explains why it’s one of the youngest super-genres. In the early days, there was a difference between **Drum ‘n’ Bass** and **Jungle** (see Old Skool Drum ‘n’ Bass). Despite a select number of fans refusing to disregard that difference, the terms have become interchangeable over the course of time. **Jungle** is the voice of the black British youth; therefore its ties with both black (**Rap**) and Jamaican (**Ragga** and **Dub**) music genres come as no surprise.

The noun **Drum ‘n’ Bass** suggests a combination of two styles, one part drum, one part bass. History teaches that this actually is more truth than fiction: early **Drum ‘n’ Bass** originates by mixing manually two compatible records from different genres, both highly sped-up. One record often provides samples to create a heavily accelerated breakbeat such as the Amen break, dubplates and **Breakbeat Hardcore** records. The other a subsonic bass line such as **Industrial**/**Brutal Techno** or **Rave**. Most **Drum ‘n’ Bass** songs use the Amen Break or Funky Drummer Break as template for their 4/4 breakbeat. Snare drums are placed at second and forth beat of a bar. **Drum ‘n’ Bass** has a very high speed, ranging between 160-190 bpm. Combined with the use of breakbeats, such high speeds make **D’n’B** instantaneously recognizable.

**Drum ‘n’ Bass** uses many special techniques to create a menacing but futuristic sound. Time-stretching (speeding up certain parts of the tracks without changing the pitch), half speed basslines (decreasing speed and pitch to create deepness), rolling bass lines (eliminating silent spaces between bass notes), and the “Drop”: launching the main part of the song, but more layered and heavier, after breakdowns and long ascending build ups. The key difference between **Breakbeat** and **Drum ‘n’ Bass** is that **Breakbeat** tries to sound “natural” and “organic”, imitating a real drummer. **Drum ‘n’ Bass** on the other hand, abandons all realism and attempts to create the opposite: synthetic, futuristic and technologic.

Whereas **“Drum ‘n’ Bass”** is rather self-explanatory, the name **“Jungle”** requires further explaining; Apparently,** Jungle** is derived from the jungle-like Tivoli Gardens in Jamaica, of which a referring sample occurs in an early Jungle Track from Rebel MC. However, countless other explanations are circulating among journalists and enthusiasts, obscuring the truth while strengthening the symbolic value of **Jungle’s** name.

**Jungle** has always had two faces, which is part of the early difference between **Jungle** and **Drum ‘n’ Bass**. After the great era of **Rave**, the whole of Dance music polarizes into two opposite universes, not the least noticeable within **Drum ‘n’ Bass**. On one side, there’s an intelligent / sophisticated / ambient / progressive approach of the music (**Old Skool D’n’B**, **Jazzstep**, **Liquid**, **Dubstep**, **UKG**, **Broken Beats**), where on the other hand there’s a hardcore / rave / extravert / linear approach (**Old Skool (Ragga) Jungle**, **Breakbeat Hardcore**, **Darkcore**, **Hardstep**, **Techstep**, **Jump Up**, **Post-Dubstep**). But these poles obviously influence each other and sometimes cross over. It is this golden combination of complex rhythms combined with deep, threatening basses that makes **Drum ‘n’ Bass** so popular. **Jungle’s** sound matches its interwoven sense of militant protest (similar to **Reggae** or **Rap**). It combines the attractiveness of “dangerous” **Rave** with the sophistication of experimental “intelligent” Dance genres: **Jungle** is a voodoo priest in the shadows - a sinister mastermind.

In current times, it has become very difficult or even pointless to separate **Hardstep**, **Techstep**, **Darkstep** and **Neurofunk**. These genres are deliberately separately mentioned on the Carta to show the size and evolution of **Drum ‘n’ Bass**, but nowadays they have more or less become one, referred to as **Darkside**. **Darkside** is – besides **Dubstep** - one of the three contemporary **Drum ‘n’ Bass** schools, alongside **Liquid** and **(Nu) Jump Up**.

### [1992] Old Skool Jungle & Old Skool Drum'n'Bass
The end of the short but intense **Rave** subculture preluded the beginning of a new one. Heavy hardcore breakbeats were chopped up and glued together to create an accelerated, rolling, syncopated rhythm. In the beginning this brand new music had two distinctive faces, later blending into one: on one hand there was a softer, ambient, rational approach to the rhythm that used the “rolls” to accompany textured melodies (**Old Skool Drum ‘n’ Bass**). On the other hand, there was the emotional approach, the voice of a hunted down generation: paranoid, ruffneck Ravers that were influenced by the matching tempo and fierceness of **Ragga (Jungle)**. **Drum ‘n’ Bass** was part of west side London culture, which was more upper class and “sophisticated”, whereas Jungle was played in the clubs of east side London. Here was the home of the black British youth, usually lower class and streetwise: picture short skirts, training suits, bling bling, sunglasses. **Jungle** subculture is **Rap** meets **Ragga** in a British jacket - in your face, militant and profane. **Jungle** rejected **Rave** culture which had become too much to bear in 1992. With menacing samples, criminal themes, and a deliberate use of cocaine and marihuana instead of XTC, the war against (white) **Rave** was on.

**Drum ‘n’ Bass** refrained from these convictions and focused on the music itself. **Jungle** versus **Drum ‘n’ Bass** polarity quickly faded and in the broad sense (the super-genre) these genres have become synonyms. Metalheadz, the principal and one of the first **Drum ‘n’ Bass** labels, never differentiated between genres either. **Raggamuffin’** style **Jungle** led to the introduction of toasting MC’s who would accompany the music live with improvised shouts and scattering catchphrases, like a sports coach gone mad, and eventually making even the white man dance.

### [1995] Hardstep & Techstep
By the mid nineties, **Rave** (in the UK) was completely dead. A new subculture had learned from its mistakes. No more huge pop-up parties, but a pirate radio network broadcasting revolting **Drum ‘n’ Bass** instead. This hardcore **Drum ‘n’ Bass** (**Hardstep**) was simple, purist music but with a very heavy subbassline, fast, 2-step drum patterns, and lots of influences from and references to **Rap**, **Ragga**, and **Dub**. It had more or less the same mentality as **Conscious Rap**: an underground army with back to the roots (black culture) music. **Hardstep’s** history however, was rather small and shortlived. It had speed and percussion, but lacked melody and atmosphere.

Around 1996-’97, **Hardstep** gets pushed aside by the successor of **Darkcore**: **Techstep**. This technical **Drum ‘n’ Bass**, influenced by **Brutal** and **Industrial Techno** barely had anything in common with the funky, sophisticated Detroit sound. Filled with heavily manipulated reese-basslines and so called “butcher beats”, this should’ve been called **Industrial Drum ‘n’ Bass**: loud, uncompromising, grotesque, nihilistic factory noise. **Techstep** almost immediately saw the potential of heavy **D’n’B** thanks to **Hardstep**, and took it up another notch. Full of sound effect experimentation, it was an antimusical sadomasochistic soundtrack, just like early **Industrial** but painted for a gritty post-Rave selfish world, instead of a conceptual movement.

Though **Techstep** is stylistically more linked to its predecessor **Darkcore** and its successor **Darkstep**, its joining with Hardstep illustrates **D’n’B’s** rapid transformation in the mid nineties and what that expresses: a requiem for a lost **Rave** dream, ruptured into an aural nightmare, like **Heavy Metal** after the flower power age. The rise in popularity of militant, underground **Drum’n’Bass** coincided with (and became propelled by) the Criminal Justice Act of 1994 in the UK, which prohibited parties with “repetitive beats” (which **Drum ‘n’ Bass** did not have).

### [1996] Jump Up
**Drum ‘n’ Bass** transformed in an avalanche of subgenres in a minimal time-span (1995-’97). These genres were significantly more complex and sophisticated than before: **Hardstep**, **Techstep**, **Darkstep**, and **Jazzstep.** The main reason for this was the compactness and affordability of hard disk recorders (HDR), replacing traditional multi-track (reel-to-reel) recorders, and which also allowed non-linear editing.

Because of **Drum ‘n’ Bass** historical connection with marihuana (favored in early **D’n’B** club culture as a reaction to **Rave’s** ecstasy excesses), an unexpected problem arose with these complex subgenres. The behavior of stationary nodding to the beat (or even sitting down) while smoking marihuana became commonplace and alarmed a number of producers. They wanted the crowd to party, which lead to a genre specifically aimed at doing so: **Jump-Up**. Definitely more heavy and bass-focused than early **Drum ‘n’ Bass** but still less dark than **Hardstep** and **Techstep**, **Jump Up** seeks to combine the most popular elements of **Jungle**, for which it sometimes also gets despised: simple, catchy melodies, **Ragga** basslines, and speedy drum loops.

Because the music was particularly aimed at dancing, it eventually brought along a new dance style, borrowed from **Punk** subculture: skank. Lately, **Jump Up** has been revived with a drier, more minimal second wave (sometimes referred to as Skank ‘n’ Bass). **Nu Jump Up**, another recent subgenre, is the synonym for **Clownstep** and thus the fusion of **Jump Up** and **Dubstep**.

### [1997] Intelligent / Ambient Drum ‘N’ Bass & Jazzstep
**Hardstep**, **Darkcore** and **Jump Up** all focused on the “ravy” side of **Drum ‘n’ Bass**, and tried to blow the crowd away with subsonic booming basslines and an avalanche of drum rolls. Very soon, a countermovement emerged that tried to recreate the original** Drum ‘n’ Bass** sound, before **Ragga** or **Darkcore** influences. As to be expected, it was neither raw or heavy, but highly polished, produced and soothing to the ear. With crossovers into other “sophisticated, intellectual” music such as **IDM** and **Jazz**, this “intelligent” **Drum ‘n Bass** took itself very seriously (some say too). Major record labels took an interest and started releasing records for the elite audio connaisseurs (with complex, deep, atmospheric melodies) and labeling itself “Artcore”, but many synonyms exist: **Ambient**, **Atmospheric** or **Intelligent Drum ‘n’ Bass** and **Jazzy Drum ‘n’ Bass** or **Jazzstep** as the more **Jazz** oriented type (though these two share so much overlapping that we regard them as sibling genres). Its “artistic”, complex nature makes the genre even more associated with cannabis than other **Drum ‘n’ Bass** – it’s often the preferred soundtrack for any non-clubbing film scene dominated by ganja presence.

**Jazzstep** and **Ambient Drum ‘n’ Bass** (which is by most preferred over the term **Intelligent Drum ‘n’ Bass**) made **Drum ‘n’ Bass** very popular, even in circles that normally don’t hold **Jungle** in high esteem. **Drum ‘n’ Bass** responded to this “intrusion” by going even deeper underground, shaping **Hardstep** into **Techstep**.

### [1997] UK Garage (2-Step & Speed Garage)
**Drum ‘n’ Bass** was hip because it was underground and brand new. The problem was that it sounded too heavy and hardcore for the masses (**Hardstep**, **Techstep**, **Darkcore**…) and that it detracted too many women from going to the clubs. British upper class designers and fashionistas created their own hipster version of **Drum ‘n’ Bass**, particularly aimed at increasing female club presence. By merging **Garage House** with **Old Skool Jungle** and adding sampled (**Neo-Soul**) vocals, a smooth, textured music was being created that had little in common with regular **Drum ‘n’ Bass**. Fine, hi-pitched breakbeats and delicate snares made this music unlike anything one would expect at a garage, although it was named **UK Garage**. This was fancy Breakbeat. Fast, but gentle, bass-driven but with a subtle timbre.

The first form of **UK Garage** was a rapid type of syncopated **Garage House**, known as **Speed Garage**. **Speed Garage’s** abundant percussion and heavy bass made the influences from **Garage House** barely noticeable and thus was still not good enough to attract a large female crowd. The genre did however attract immediate attention from major record labels. **Speed Garage** became influenced by **Ragga** and **Drum ‘n’ Bass** (particularly **Hardstep**) which altered its time signature in two beats per bar instead of four, which is known as **“2-Step”**. Despite these influences, **2-Step Garage** abandoned bass in favor of sharp but soft treble and returned the sound of **Garage House** with a touch of **R&B**.

These two **UK Garage** genres marked the start of a large music family - also known as **UK Garage** - that led to **Dubstep** and **UK Bass**. But **2-Step** is also the beginning of **Nu R&B**. Not only due to its sound and rhythm, but by spreading a culture of upper-class clubbing that became notorious (and eventually despised) for its cocain use and promiscuous encounters.

### [1999] Neurofunk
The name **Neurofunk** suggests a soft, ambient genre, but it’s still very much alive and kicking. **Techstep’s** popular “destroy-‘em-all”-attitude formed a powerful mainstream sound in the world of **Jungle**. This stream evolved into something new; something more clinical and less melodic with ambient drone sounds and blips of noise, but still aggressive and Ravelike. “Neuro” – as it is called – sounds like the natural soundtrack of the brain: neurological chemicals flowing and rushing, creating both deeply obscure and delicate emotions. As the name suggests, Neurofunk borrowed some influence from **Funk** (and **Jazz**) to make this happen, but in a barely noticeable manner. The difference between **Techstep** and **Neurofunk** can be challenging. Important is that **Neurofunk** incorporates acid sounds (it might even be called **“Acidstep”**) and features few or moderate builds and breakdowns. **Neurofunk** is a continuous stream of washes and waves emitting a strong atmosphere that sparks the imagination. **Neurofunk** aka **Futurestep** likes to reel you in a science-fiction or anime fantasy world with its hyper-clean production, yet remains as hard and dark as **Drum ‘n’ Bass** can be. A spookier, grittier version called **Darkneuro**, also exists and even more subgenres though that would be really splitting hairs.

### [2000] Liquid Funk
Who would have thought that DJ Fabio’s small experiment of compiling a bunch of **Jazzstep** artists with a different, friendlier and more uptempo sound, could turn out into **Drum ‘n’ Bass** gaining massive mainstream audience? The name of the compilation – **Liquid Funk** – is a serious contester for worst named genre. No-one knows why it’s called Liquid and its **Funk** influences are rather minimal. **Liquid (Funk)** has a wide variety of **R&B** and **Jazz** tunes and lately **Disco/House** has become the dominant influence. Even more than **Jazzstep**, production is extremely polished, resulting in a delicate, colorful, washing, ambient sound like waves made of satin rainbow glitters. Whereas any other **Drum ‘n’ Bass** genre is music for the night, **Liquid Funk** is music for the day; to be played at festivals or simply at home.

Over the years, **Liquid Funk** evolves from a slightly different kind of **Jazzstep **with some **Funk** elements to a faster and richer or layered sound, and finally to a heavily vocalized and exuberant one (very uncommon in the world of **D’n’B**). This last style has gained quite a momentum after 2010, due to ever popular catchy diva vocals and collaboration with other artists, bridging the (once unbridgeable) gap between **Drum ‘n’ Bass** and **Pop** music. A vibrant Liquid club scene is alive throughout the world, where people prefer the optimistic or sentimental sound over nihilistic, dark, industrial **Rave** beats.

### [2001] Breakbeat Garage & Grime
At the turn of the millennium, **UK Garage** & **2-Step lose their momentum. The scene changes into two different directions: **Nu Dark Swing**, a darker and moodier bassline focused form preluding **Dubstep**, and **Breakstep,** a more breakbeat focused form. **Breakstep** aka **Breakbeat Garage** leaves all **House** and fancy influences behind, and almost immediately a new garde of very young artists starts adding rap vocals and more **Drum ‘n’ Bass** elements on top of this. The old **UKG** classes of ’96 and ’98 however, found it hard to get along with such an aggressive style and a generational gap ensues. This battle was soon won by the youth, as the “old” garde had lost all connection with everyday (street) life. From the comfort of their own bedrooms, British kids started to make home produced music, featuring D’n’B-like breaks at a slower Garage tempo (140 bpm) with dark, ‘grimy’ rhymes: **Grime** is born. Thanks to internet streaming, **Grime** rapidly conquers the globe. Its violent sawtooth basslines onto lo-fi riddims (due to inexpensive, DIY software) was truly unique and original in an era of few innovative genres. **Grime** bridges **Rap**, **Breakbeat**, and **Drum ‘n’ Bass**, and brings **Garage** back to the streets, to the youth and to the clubs. Its popularity and subsonic quality becomes exposed by its variety of aliases (**8bar**, **UK Bashment**, **Sub Low**, **Eskibeat**), and it would have been the star of the nillies if **Dubstep** didn’t claim that prize shortly after.

### [2003] Dubstep
**Dubstep** can be described as the only true innovative Dance genre since 2000 (alongside **Grime**), and is sometimes even labeled as a super-genre on its own. After all, it’s hard to categorize; falling somewhere in between **Breakbeat**, **Drum ‘n’ Bass**, **Downtempo** and Jamaican music (**Dub**). **Drum ‘n’ Bass** is chosen here, as **Dubstep** is most closely related to its subculture and most similar in instrumentation and sound manipulation, but there are large differences.

Just like **Dub**, **Dubstep** started out as instrumental B-sides, only **Grime** ones instead of **Reggae**. Popularity rose beyond expectations however, when **UK Garage’s** involvement around bling bling, champagne, and mainstream success became too much to bear for the average **UKG** fan. Underground radio Rinse FM and specialized **Dubstep** club nights in the UK tapped into that discontent and were responsible for shaping the genre into an institution.

Early or True **Dubstep** is recognizable by an eerie, ambient soundscape, heavily influenced by **Dub**, which it lost over the years in subsequent subgenres. To fully appreciate **Dubstep**, a decent subwoofer or (club) sound system is vital, as frequencies tend to drop even below **Drum ‘n’ Bass**. These LFO-subsonic basslines are often re-oscillated, creating the stereotypical **Dubstep** “wobbly bass”, which got transferred to other music genres afterwards. **Dubstep** has a steady repetitive drum rhythm (kick-snare-kick-snare) stretched far apart, and thus leaving lots of listening room, while also making **Dubstep** appear slower than its actual tempo (140bpm). Overall sound production can either be hyperclean (like **Neurofunk**) or gritty/industrial (like **Techstep**). **Dubstep** is about surprising and touching the inner mind with sound experiments, no matter the manipulation, just like **Dub** did before. Therefore lots of effort is being put in percussion arrangements and distortion of mid-range sounds. The long and eager anticipation of young electronic composers for their own revolutionary genre– the sound of the nillies generation - naturally led to an abundance of crossovers, subgenres and a more commercial approach: enter **Post-Dubstep**.

### [2004] Bassline & UK funky
The **UK Grime** scene had always been a violent, criminal, ghetto scene reminding a lot of **Gangsta Rap**, but with the rising advent of **Dubstep** the adjectives “dark”, “slow” and “weird” could be added to its personality. This detracted too many girls from coming to the clubs and **UK Garage** had to reapply its very reason of existence to itself. History became repeated and **Speed Garage** was used to alter **Grime** in such a way that the female crowd was well represented. Naturally, **Dubstep** had some influence as well and a more continuous bass sound led to the name of this new genre: **Bassline**. Sheffield was the breeding ground for the **UK Grime** and **Bassline** scene; especially the club Niche, which had to close down after incidents of violence, drug use and gang criminality. The name of the club is also appropriately used as a synonym for Bassline: it's a nice genre with a secluded subculture.

Because **Bassline** was even faster than **Speed Garage** and still quite aggressive, **UK Funky** had to make sure the trick to even out gender ratio could not fail and used **Funky & Deep House** as well as **Dub** and **Broken Beats** to create an exotic, percussion-heavy type of **UK Garage**. One could almost say this was **“Tribal Garage”**, with houselike tempo and synths.


### [2007] Post-Dubstep
In early **Dubstep**, beat drops were accentuated by the stretched drum pattern. Over the course of time, these drops became more and more important, with long build-ups running up to them. Artists even held races to see who could create “the biggest drop”. Ambient soundscapes also got replaced by hooks providing catchy melodic themes. When finally mid-frequency rifflike synth lines get introduced in the famous subgenre **Brostep**, **Dubstep** becomes accepted by the masses in the US and a versatile template on which just about any song can get remixed. This sparked a huge wave of revulsion between the early **Dubstep** producers/fans and the new (**Post-Dubstep**) garde, particularly *Skrillex*. **Dubstep** breaks loose out of its UK underground environment and spreads like a virus to other contemporary genres also eager to cross over: **Electro House** / **Ghettotech** / **Trap** / **Nu R&B** / **Grime**. A whole array of subgenres appears on the stage, but most importantly is the merging with **Drum ‘n’ Bass**. Hereby, **Dubstep** reinvigorated the super-genre and united both subcultures in the form of **Drumstep**. Apart from alternating between **Jump-Up’s** rolling and** Dubstep’s** chopped breakbeats, **Drumstep** is composed in half-time rhythm.

In 2010, **Post-Dubstep** as a name arises, which is a collection of many subgenres. Besides **Brostep** and **Drumstep**, **Post- Dubstep** includes the crossovers **Funkstep** and **Electrostep,** and the harder subgenres **Deep Dubstep** (return to **Dubstep** roots like the implementation of LFO wobbly bass) and **Filthstep** (**Dubstep** with “filthy” synth lines).

### [2009] Future Garage & Future Bass
If you would imagine what the future of **UK Garage** would sound like, you probably wouldn’t deviate too much from **“Future Garage”**: genre-defying, hypereclectic, hard-to-define. **Future Garag**e is influenced by many contemporary genres, not the least **Chillwave** and **Post-Dubstep**, who are highly diverse themselves. To reconcile the rather dreamy, poplike character of **Chillwave** with the heavy, uptempo sound of **Post-Dubstep**, a middle ground was created that is more like the center of the musical universe: anything goes. However, in order not to stray afar from one influence or another, this middle ground is more defined and constrained than expected. Especially after the coalescence with **Trapstep**, a genre that rhythm- and tempo-wise seamlessly blends in. And thus **Future Garage** turns around 2014 into **Future Bass**. Due to considerable overlapping, it is not recommended separating these genres. **Future Bass** – the newest big music genre so far – combines detuned, enveloped synths with ambient, natural sounds and pronounced offbeats. Synthed out and melancholic but joyful vocals (almost always female) add to a fast rising popularity. **Future Bass** has a very recognizable mood: the music submerges you into a surreal aquarium with “glittering” sounds (similar to the latest developments in **Liquid Funk**), where you can hear both the distant drums from the jungle shore and the muted wailings of sirens on the rocks. Already, copious subgenres have emerged, who work on different types of mood, such as **Dreambass**, **Ambient Bass**, and **Nightbass**.
