## Gospel
- [[1870] (Negro) Spirituals & Worksongs](#1870-Negro-Spirituals--Worksongs)
- [[1947] Modern Gospel](#1947-Modern-Gospel)
- [[1880] Traditional Gospel](#1880-Traditional-Gospel)
- [[1890] Ragtime & Stride](#1890Ragtime--Stride)
- [[1968] Relipop & Relirock / CCM (Contemporary Christian Music)](#1968-Relipop--Relirock--CCM-Contemporary-Christian-Music))

The very first popular music genres came from a variety of influences but the foundations were laid in the United States. Before **Blues** and **Jazz** developed themselves, a number of “proto-genres” responsible for that development, were already known and popular throughout the country: **Ragtime**, **Stride**, **Jug Bands**, and **Skiffle**. But the most important one was **Gospel**. **Gospel** evolved from the fragile voice from black slaves into an undeniably huge genre with many subgenres. **Gospel** shakes off pretty fast its racial dimension: black and white join hand in hand to sing the song of God. Because **Gospel** is more about faith than about race; about believing in a better world and future and connecting different souls.

As Gospel expands and diversifies, questions are raised about the integrity of some artists and the music itself. Are some in it for the money or do they really speak the word of the Lord? Nowadays, **Gospel** is rarely a part of mainstream music media but without it, there would be no **Rhythm ‘n’ Blues** or perhaps even no popular music at all. However, in many churches and religious communities (especially in the southern part of the US) **Gospel** lives on strongly and is heavily produced, sung and experienced in sermons that induce ecstatic bliss in listeners, the likes other subcultures have never seen.

Though **Gospel** is already eclectic on its own, almost every popular music genre – from **Rap** to **Metal** – has been reshaped into a **Gospel** subgenre. Therefore a precise definition of **Gospel** in a broad sense is lacking, but the genre has some characteristics. Vocals for example, are usually sung in a “call-and-response” manner: a legacy from old church sermons, where the priest sings one part and the choir responds that same part. Not to create a cappella backbeat rhythm (although it was), but simply because of the fact that most church attendants were illiterate. Early Gospel only had piano accompaniment. Percussion was achieved by voice and handclapping. However, one should not underestimate the amount of rhythm achieved in traditional Gospel, another key characteristic of the music. Other pioneering popular music genres work with whatever set-up they could find or afford; easy to produce instruments like banjo or sometimes rudimentary tools such as washboards, kazoos, or jugs. Modern or contemporary Gospel draws cues from any genre and therefore works with a whole variety of instruments.

The word “gospel” comes from two Old English words: “good” (which lost a vowel and became misinterpreted for the word God) and “spel”, which means a story or a message. Thus gospel is actually the same word as godspel or goodspel: fortunate news. This etymology is quite interesting, because it transcends Gospel’s religious (and narrow) dimension: the music is first and foremost a bringer of good news, no matter what faith one has: a herald of joy. And this is the power of Gospel: Gospel gathers people together, incites a sense of community, and inspires to do good, to bring good and to feel good.

Gospel is frequently forgotten as a super-genre in music genealogies, pushed away by bigger and more dominant families such as Blues, R&B, or Jazz. The collection of Gospel music is substantial though, with countless artists – even today – connected by their Christian faith. However, Gospel has taken on so many forms and styles that a common ground besides the message is sometimes hard to find. As the oldest popular music genre - the matriarch – it should be no wonder that Gospel has changed substantially throughout the years, but it has survived for more than a century: an accomplishment other genres still have to achieve.

### [1870] (Negro) Spirituals & Worksongs
An interesting fact about Popular Music is that it emerged out of necessity rather than being a form of art or expression. The earliest genres can be traced back as early as the 19th century, at a time when slavery of African people was still omnipresent in the United States. These first generations of Afro-Americans would often sing songs during their hard labor, inspired by the native rhythms of their home continent. Besides relieving a bit of the suffering, their worksongs also acted as a clever communication tool for hidden messages. Disguised as rhythmical a cappella music, worksongs allowed slaves to bypass overseer control. Worksongs aka “hollers” are characterized by repetitive humming in canon, and already make use of “blue notes”. The main influences of the very first popular music genre are African roots music, black Folk ballads and Jug bands.

Another, later example of putting the African musical heritage to “practical” use, are the Negro-Spirituals: sung prayers to offer a flicker of hope during whatever spare private time remained. Spirituals are much longer songs, with loud, sharp and nasal lyrics. Eventually these Spirituals blended with church hymns and became Gospel. Racist minstrel shows for white people got notice of this “Negro” music and started performing parodies. Ironically, these discriminating farces helped spread unknown black music culture throughout the land and thereby shaped Blues and Jazz.
### [1880] Traditional Gospel
Between 1880 and 1930, Gospel slowly evolved from small, flickering Spirituals to a bright, popular flame, sung and known by many American people, both black and white, but all fundamentally Christian. Gospel started as emotional church hymns, with a call and response choir. This means that one part of the choir sings a part and the other responds in a different key (harmonizing). This alternating play of chords with unusual intervals would become an important trademark in a lot of popular music. Early or Traditional Gospel (sometimes known as Jubilee) is mostly music performed by barbershop quartets. But after Ragtime, it received accompaniment by a piano. Because there were almost no instruments, the lyrics were obviously important, talking about nothing but good news, hope, and bliss. At the turn of the century, the first Gospel composition was created. By 1920 the term “Gospel songs” was first used, and they were practiced in rural, southern America by both black and white people (albeit in slightly different forms). The black form of this “Southern Gospel” evolved by 1930 into what is known as “Black Gospel”. By this time Gospel was a well established music genre, with real artists instead of enthusiasts.
### [1890] Ragtime & Stride
Ragtime is a peculiar genre unlike anything else listed on the Carta and an important pioneer of Blues and (especially) Jazz, forming a sort of link between popular and earlier non-popular music. At the end of the nineteenth century we see this music, inspired by European brass bands, French contredanse and banjo dance music, emerging in any saloon, bar, or bordello in the United States that harbored a piano. Ironically Ragtime is the complete opposite of the stereotypical far-west or southern US brothel image: disciplined, structured and calm. Only one person and a piano form this genre. The song structure varies a lot, but is completely written out with no room for improvisation. One hand plays the melody, while the other plays the (also changing) bassline, which creates a certain tension between melody and bass. The name is derived from the earliest examples of these “broken” rhythmic songs, known as “rags”. Remarkably, a revival of Ragtime appeared almost a century later in the seventies.

In the early twenties Ragtime evolves into Stride which allows for more improvisation and showmanship. Ragtime and Stride own a lot of their popularity to Foxtrot: a popular dance that emerged in the 1910s.

### [1947] Modern Gospel
Between 1880 and 1930, Gospel slowly evolved from small, flickering Spirituals to a bright, popular flame, sung and known by many American people, both black and white, but all fundamentally Christian. Gospel started as emotional church hymns, with a call and response choir. This means that one part of the choir sings a part and the other responds in a different key (harmonizing). This alternating play of chords with unusual intervals would become an important trademark in a lot of popular music. Early or Traditional Gospel (sometimes known as Jubilee) is mostly music performed by barbershop quartets. But after Ragtime, it received accompaniment by a piano. Because there were almost no instruments, the lyrics were obviously important, talking about nothing but good news, hope, and bliss. At the turn of the century, the first Gospel composition was created. By 1920 the term “Gospel songs” was first used, and they were practiced in rural, southern America by both black and white people (albeit in slightly different forms). The black form of this “Southern Gospel” evolved by 1930 into what is known as “Black Gospel”. By this time Gospel was a well established music genre, with real artists instead of enthusiasts.

### [1968] Relipop & Relirock / CCM (Contemporary Christian Music)
From the sixties onwards, **Gospel** took a more modern approach, incorporating elements from **Pop** and **Rock** (**Jesus Rock & Relipop**). Especially the free spirit of **Acid Rock**, **Folk Rock**, and **Rock ‘n’ Roll** proved to be a good match with the optimism of religious **Gospel**. These early crossovers became known as the umbrella term Contemporary Christian Music (CCM).

When **Disco**, **Rap** and **Metal** became popular, **Gospel** took a surprising interest in these genres too (Gospco (Disco + Gospel), Gospel Rap, Heaven’s & White Metal), trying to reach as many people as possible with the message of God. CCM became a wide and diverse collection of uplifting musical styles, too diverse to define. Indeed, genre was subordinate to the content. Therefore these various subgenres are not bound by a technical common ground, and rarely listed in music genealogies.
