## Hardcore Punk Rock
- [[1977] Anarcho-Punk, Crust Punk, & D-Beat / Discore](#1977-Anarcho-Punk-Crust-Punk--D-Beat-Discore)
- [[1980] Original Hardcore (Punk)](#1980-Original-Hardcore-Punk)
- [[1983] Crossover Trash](../master/metal.md#1983-Crossover-Trash)
- [[1986] Grindcore](../master/metal.md#1986-Grindcore)
- [[1989] Post-Hardcore, Emo & Screamo](#1989-Post-Hardcore-Emo--Screamo)
- [[1999] Metalcore/NWOAHM (New Wave Of American Heavy Metal)](#1999-metalcorenwoahm-new-wave-of-america-heavy-metal)
- [[2003] Synthcore & Crunkcore](#2003-Synthcore--Crunkcore)

**Hardcore Punk** evolved out of the dominant musical era of **Punk Rock** in the late seventies. When the eighties arrived, many artists were fed up with **Punk’s** excesses (or at least **Punk’s** reputation as media liked to exaggerate on its scandals), or else they were disillusioned by the evaporation of **Punk’s** political message. What started as merely a subgenre of **Punk** (among many others), grew exponentially both in the US and the UK. A number of bands were on the rise that tried to implement either political content or a notion of purity: both in music and lifestyle. **Hardcore** bands emerged like fresh mushrooms from the rotten **Punk** soil. Especially in the US, every region or city received its own famous **Hardcore** band and every high school experienced their local amateur **Hardcore** teen band.

Technically, **Hardcore** is based on **Punk Rock**, but much faster and with shorter, bursting songs. It’s like a **Punk Rock** song of three or four minutes is compressed in a time span of less than two minutes. Such high speed has obviously an effect on voice: **Hardcore** vocalists shout with short bursting strokes, almost like an army sergeant. Instrumentation, song structure and sound manipulation however, stay similar to **Punk**.

**Hardcore** is more defined within its lifestyle: a subculture of discipline and purity. Many **Hardcore** bands and fans live by a strict anti-hedonist code, with no drugs, healthy food, bald or shaven haircut, jeans and shirts, and badges or pins marking honor and respect. Nevertheless, the average perception of **Hardcore Punk** leans towards the negative, as the music is often associated with aggression and violence due to the musical content and the appearance of fans or bands. But this is mostly because of a lack of knowledge about the subculture.

A strong sense of community and pride sways over Hardcore culture, with recurring mottos like “Hardcore Will Never Die” and “Forever Hardcore”. It is peculiar to see that the same mentality of strength - with comradeship and slogans - is also traceable in **Hardcore Techno**, a genre that technically is very different from **Hardcore Punk**. Mosh pits, a type of “dance” where the crowd violently starts kicking and pushing each other around (“moshing”) in a circle, also found its origin in Hardcore culture and remains a common part of it.

**Hardcore** is mostly an underground thing; mainstream radio or TV attention is minimal, despite a very radio friendly format (regarding song length). Instead, **Hardcore** lives – stronger than any other super-genre – in the show or gig. Hardcore gigs are smaller than other ones and usually indoors. However, the crowd is often downright fanatic and the interaction between band and crowd is bigger, with smaller and lower stages. There where the DIY approach of Hardcore gets translated into performance, where electric synergy between band and crowd occurs, where mosh pits organically evolve and dissolve again, where communities get formed…that is where **Hardcore** is home.

By merging with **Heavy Metal**, **Hardcore Punk** diversifies and knows how to reinvent itself. But the most intriguing thing about **Hardcore** is not the music or subculture, but a far-reaching ethos of DIY (do-it-yourself) that exposes society conventions within music industry and how they are all too easily accepted instead of challenged. **Hardcore** works largely with small record labels, or band members release their very own record label. Artists become entrepreneurs and distance themselves from capitalism. With the help of local support, such as T-shirt sales, they manage to survive and maintain their musical integrity. Though certainly not all Hardcore bands were anti-commercial or against major record companies. In fact, the failure of a mainstream breakthrough of (Post-)Hardcore bands, urged certain bands to change their sound. This offered them a larger audience, though they were still forced to work with smaller, independent labels. And thus **Indie Rock** was born.

### [1977] Anarcho-Punk, Crust Punk, & D-Beat / Discore
**Punk Rock** was besides music also a marketing machine, cleverly steered by the movement’s frontman and Sex Pistol’s manager *Malcolm Mclaren*. In response, a new subgenre answered to the machine: **Anarcho-Punk** (which lent its name from the Sex Pistol’s infamous single “Anarchy in the UK”). It wasn’t really anarchistic though, mostly reactionary towards **Punk Rock**. These bands swore by heavy DIY approach, little marketing or publicity, and by their own record production, forming the prelude to **Hardcore Punk**. A strong community sense, is another trademark of **Anarcho-Punk**, both by the artists and their fans. But most importantly (as there is not much difference in sound with early Punk Rock) are real political messages, fueled by a distaste for the lyrical shallowness of some of Punk Rock’s most famous bands. Political reaction grew stronger when conservative Margaret Thatcher took office in the UK in 1979, who proved to be a long lasting punching bag for **Punk’s** offspring genres.

A while after the development of **Hardcore Punk** (around 1985), **Anarcho-Punk** gets heavily influenced by **Extreme Metal** (both **Black** and **Speed**). This is clearly discernible in both a more chaotic and faster sound. Two **Punk Rock** subgenres emerge: **Crust (Punk)** aka **Crustcore** and **D-Beat** or **Discore**. **Crust** is a heavy, bass-filled style, much more nihilistic and bleak than **Anarcho** and the predecessor of **Grindcore**. **D-Beat** or **Discore** is a smaller and more straightforward style named after its repetitive, stuttering drum beats, which was particularly popular in Sweden.

### [1980] Original Hardcore (Punk)
If **Punk** did survive, then it was in the spirit of **Hardcore**. Only this kind of no-nonsense rock harbored the bursting energy typical of **Punk** and even took it a step further. **Hardcore (Punk)** is extremely fast, raw, heavy and explosive. Many hardcore songs are even less than two minutes. It’s just a kick in the head with drums, guitars and shouting, angry vocals. The anarchy and chaos tangible in the music (just like **Punk**) seems to be the direct opposite of Hardcore’s disciplined lifestyle: **Hardcore** artists and fans are often known to be puritanical, non-hedonistic, strict and loyal. Some subgroups take this very seriously (almost militant) and have their own subgenres such as **Straight-Edge**. The reason for this paradox (anarchy versus order) can be explained by the inner core of hardcore, its essence: protest. **Hardcore** is all about critique on society, government and lifestyle.

**Original Hardcore** rose fast to popularity, leaving a long trail of subgenres in its wake: **Straight-Edge** (very purist and full of selfrespect), **Bent-Edge** (more the opposite), **Beatdown Hardcore** (very heavy and slower, leading to **Deathcore**), **Nardcore** (local California scene), and last-but-not-least **Melodic Hardcore**, which traded some velocity and fierceness for melody. New York was (and still is) one of the most important spawning pools of Hardcore, which led to the term **New York Hardcore** (N.Y.H.C.), but this is not really a separate subgenre.

### [1989] Post-Hardcore, Emo & Screamo
**Post-Hardcore** can be either a genre on its own or an umbrella term for any “pure” **Hardcore**-derivative (i.e. without links to **Metal**). Just like **Post-Punk** differs from **Punk**, so does **Post-Hardcore** differ from **Hardcore** as a less bursting, less aggressive continuation of the genre (though still more heavy than other **Rock** genres). **Post-Hardcore** implements a longer and more complex arrangement, with tempo changes adding a certain alternating dynamic to **Hardcore**. Besides screaming or grunting, **Post-Hardcore** also allows “normal” vocals, usually wailing about depressing or introspective thoughts. Similar to **Pop Punk** or **Nu Metal**, it is a prime example of so called “Therapy Rock”: music as self-psychology.

**Post-Hardcore** is dividable into three waves. The first one started in the mid eighties and encloses only a number of avant-garde bands. In the second wave, **Post-Punk** along with its **Dub** and **Fusion** influences further molded **Post-Hardcore** into a versatile adventurer. The third and most important wave encompasses **Screamo** and **Emocore** (or **Emo**): a poetic, emotional genre with quiet, slower passages and more artistic lyrics. **Emo** tries to break the ties with **Original Hardcore**, which was deemed too conservative and uniform. **Screamo** (a variant of **Emo**) adds screaming vocals. In the nillies, **Screamo** gets further detached from **Hardcore** (towards **Metal**) and becomes more polished while riffs become more metallic.

**Post-Hardcore** is still a very large and living genre, with recent yet dubious subgenres, such as **“Crabcore”**. **Mathcore** (listed on the Carta as a sibling to **Math Rock**) is often also regarded as a part of **Post-Hardcore**.

### [2003] Synthcore & Crunkcore
After more than twenty years, the purity of **Hardcore** evaporated by adding sequencers and synthesizers on top of its simple, strict **Rock** instrumentarium. However, **Hardcore** has always been a genre with a tendency to crossover, whether it’s **Punk**, **Ska**, **Metal**, or **Rap**. **Electronicore** or **Synthcore** (or **Trancecore**) is **Metalcore** with contrasting (by default) synth melodies, which makes for some interesting unexpected sounds. Sometimes the singer also uses **Autotune**, which makes **Electronicore** sound more poplike and commercial then other Hardcore genres.

Another similar and extreme crossover of **Hardcore Punk**, evolving around the same time, is **Crunkcore** (aka **Crunk Punk**, **Screamo-Crunk** or **Scrunk**). **Crunkcore **is the unexpected fusion of **Screamo** and **Crunk** (a form of South Rap). **Crunkcore** also uses **Autotune** and influences from EDM (particularly **Techno**) like **Synthcore**. **Crunkcore** has very little **Hardcore** spirit left: the bottom line of almost every song evolves around a frantic theatrics of “partyin’ down”, as if southern rappers tried to disguise themselves as a fraternity hardcore band at a college party.

The difference between **Synthcore** and **Crunkcore** is large but they both represent a type of **Hardcore** that strays far away from its roots into unknown territory. With **Synthcore’s** “dangerous” leap towards Electronic music, confusion in the world of genres is at an all-time high, as both **(Hardcore) Techno** and **(Hardcore) Punk** spawn different types of “-cores” with identical names (such as **Trancecore**). However, a fusion is never out of reach; as speed, loudness and discipline tie these outer worlds together.
