## Hardcore
- [[1987] New Beat](../master/techno.md#1987-New-Beat)
- [[1990] Hardcore Techno / Rave](../master/techno.md#1990-Hardcore-Techno--Rave)
- [[1991] Breakbeat Hardcore & Piano House (Rave II)](#1991-Breakbeat-Hardcore--Piano-House-Rave-II)
- [[1993] Darkcore & Darkstep](#1993-Darkcore--Darkstep)
- [[1993] Gabber](#1993-Gabber)
- [[1994] Happy Hardcore & Bouncy Techno](#1994-Happy-Hardcore--Bouncy-Techno)
- [[1996] Speedcore, Frenchcore & Terrorcore](#1996-Speedcore-Frenchcore--Terrorcore)
- [[1997] Digital Hardcore & Breakcore](#1997-Digital-Hardcore--Breakcore)
- [[1999] UK Hardcore & Freeform / Trancecore & Acidcore](#1999-UK-Hardcore--Freeform--Trancecore--Acidcore)
- [[2000] Hardstyle (& Jumpstyle)](#2000-Hardstyle--Jumpstyle)
- [[2002] NU Style (Gabber) / Mainstream Hardcore](#2002-Nu-Style-Gabber--Mainstream-Hardcore)

Originally, **Hardcore** was a subgenre of **Techno**, but one strongly influenced by **(Acid) House** (thus being a hybrid). When compared to other EDM super-genres, **Hardcore** has no clear start but is the result of a gradual evolution. It is characterized by being harder, darker and faster than regular **Techno**, in which there (literally) is no more room for **Funk/Electro** basslines. This evolution was spearheaded by the steep rise of XTC (and in lesser extent amphetamines), founded in early **Acid House/Madchester** club culture. Though **Hardcore** can take on a greater variety of forms than most people suspect, the common factor has been consistent throughout its history: sheer ecstasy; an intense rush preferably shared with a massive crowd to intensify even more. Where (regular) **Techno** has a built-in restraint for the formulaic and **House** tries to please as many as possible, **Hardcore** is without compromise. It can be silly, cheesy, thundering, ruthless, ridiculous, exaggerated or all of the above, marketing itself to a much narrower niche of listeners. However, in turn these listeners are grateful for providing such traits eschewed by other Dance genres and thereby form a loyal fan base: a smaller but harder core.

A very distinguishable feature of **Hardcore** is that it is (usually) a lot faster than other Dance music, starting from 150-160 bpm and sometimes even reaching 1000bpm (which results in a single tone). If it’s not particularly fast, like **New Beat** or the First Wave of **Rave**, it is definitely much harder and more menacing than other Dance music, favouring sound distortions and very deep bass. **Hardcore** seldom uses melodies, but relies on a composition of synth stabs to create melodic treble. Similar to **Punk’s** power chords, synth stabs create a “broken” but more powerful and energetic feel. Uniquely, **Hardcore** can either have a steady, hyper-fast four-to-the-floor beat, which includes the most well-known genres, or a breakbeat in the form of more obscure fusions with **Jungle** and **Breakbeat**.

The psychoactive effect of XTC on music listening has probably been the main contributor of **Hardcore Techno’s** entire development. In high dosages, the drug pushes the music more to the background while tightening the senses and thereby creating a craving for more intense and ecstatic music. As the average XTC consumption grew larger and larger (especially in the Netherlands), **Hardcore’s** sound altered too. Until the tempo and heaviness became too much, and slowly **Hardcore** geared down again. Despite heavy XTC and amphetamine use, there are a significant amount of drug-free fans, some even straight-edge. For these people, music simply cannot be intense enough and **Hardcore** provides something no other genre can deliver.

**Hardcore Techno** can be divided into two large music groups: Rave XL and Gabber XL. The first group, the collection of **Rave** genres (**New Beat**, true **Hardcore Techno**, **Darkcore**, **Breakbeat Hardcore**, **Freetekno**, **Acidcore**, etc.) is an even more well-known phenomenon than the encompassing super-genre Hardcore. Its excesses reached large media coverage during **Rave’s** peak years (1990-1992). **Rave** started **Hardcore’s** culture of massive parties (known as “Raves” ) filled with wild, exuberant people and all kinds of silly extravaganza. Yellow smileys, candy colors, bubble solution, glow sticks, whistles, sunglasses at night and oversized clothing: anything goes in the world of **Rave**.

The second music group, **Gabber** and related Hard Dance genres (early **Gabber**, **Speedcore**, **Terrorcore**, **Nu Style**, **Hardstyle**, **Jumpstyle**,…), took a more serious but also more extreme approach. It concentrated on the (intensity of the) music and shielding off its culture from outsiders. Moving pop-up raves became replaced by smaller and fixed (club) parties, but eventually mega dance events returned the spirit of ecstatic **Rave**. Gabber XL (in the broad sense) survived by transmuting into a more accessible style, influenced by Hard Dance. There’s a large but interesting obscure area of crossover styles between Hardcore and other EDM genres. **Hardstyle**, **Jumpstyle** and **Tekstyle** now hold **Hardcore’s** key to the future. But in these eclectic times, constrained super-genres seem highly unlikely. Which is a good thing considering **Rave** and **Gabber** have already penetrated the outer limits of the Dance galaxy and sown the seeds of **Hardcore**.

### [1991] Breakbeat Hardcore & Piano House (Rave II)
**Breakbeat Hardcore** is an important EDM genre with a fairly complex evolution. Early **Hip House** rappers started to make accelerated, silly **Pop House** music that became quite popular within **Acid House** Rave culture. This music then merges with early **Hardcore Techno** into true **Breakbeat Hardcore**, aka **Old Skool Hardcore**.

**Breakbeat Hardcore** has pitched breakbeats, half-speed basslines, and is known by a very amateur, raw, DIY sound with simplistic artwork and an arsenal of illegal samples. Anyone could quite easily make this music, and a huge underground pirate movement took matters into their own hands, churning out the so called ‘Ardkore record after record. Just like **Free Techno**, **Free Hardcore** was born. Immediately afterwards, **Breakbeat Hardcore** becomes influenced by **Ragga** (resulting in Proto **Drum ‘n’ Bass** known at the time as “Hardcore Jungle Techno”) and by **Eurodance** (resulting in **Pop-Rave**), but mainly by **Italo Disco** (resulting in 4-beat and **Piano House** aka **Italo House**). As such **Breakbeat Hardcore** became the basis for an immense collection of music.

Fueled by massive XTC-consumption, all these genres became one big subculture of overlapping styles, resulting in a much more expansive, second wave of **Rave**. This wave differs from the first one due to a happier and more uptempo sound. All the dark and heavy **Techno** influences were thrown overboard and speedy piano melodies onto looping breakbeats were introduced instead. Subbasslines and raplike intermezzo verses or sampled catchphrase lyrics remained, but were overshadowed by the fast tempo or diva vocals. The lyrics often dealt either about extreme happiness or nightlife and dancing. For its fans, all these elements intertwine into pure ecstatic, celestial music as if one had found the gates to Heaven.

### [1993] Darkcore & Darkstep
The trinity of pioneering **Jungle** genres (**Jungle**, **Drum ‘n’ Bass**, and **Darkcore**) almost emerged simultaneously and it’s still very hard to say which influenced which. While **D’n’B** and **Jungle** sounded quite similar, **Darkcore** clearly was something different. It was literally the dark side of **Rave**: ecstasy addicts (as were many Ravers) being confronted with the side-effects of intensive drug abuse. Darkcore was the after-XTC-soundtrack: a nightmare of paranoia, hallucinations, and depression, being intensified by government suppression of **Rave** parties. Besides the aural equivalent of withdrawal, **Darkcore** was also a reaction to the increasing ridiculousness of **Breakbeat Hardcore**: too happy, too cartoonish, too childish. Disturbing sounds, awkward time-stretching techniques, and horror film samples combined with an ultrafast tempo of 180bpm, provided adequate ammunition to combat the “stupid” **Rave** scene. Take note: this scene struck successfully back afterwards with **Happy Hardcore** and **Handbag House**.

After **Darkcore** and **Techstep**, **Darkstep** takes place on the **Jungle** stage (around 1997-’98). **Darkstep** can be described as a fusion of **Darkcore** and **Techstep**; it also features horror samples, and distorted basslines and has quite complex and dissonant rhythms. **Darkstep** is recognizable by undoubtedly being the darkest and hardest of all **Drum ‘n’ Bass** subgenres, which is quite a feat. **Darkstep** is a machine out of hell on a zealous rampage.

**Darkstep** and **Techstep** evolve in the 21st century into Dark **Drum ‘n’ Bass** aka **Darkside**: a more modern and eclectic approach that can also serve as an umbrella term for **Hardstep**, **Techstep**, **Darkcore**, **Darkstep** and **Neurofunk**.

### [1993] Gabber
Over the course of time, there have been many music genres to provide after work stress relief in the weekends, by the common principle “work hard play harder”. When you are a dock worker in the cold and industrial harbor city of Rotterdam, that principle can only lead to the hardest music imaginable. Thus in the Netherlands the original link of **Hardcore** with **Industrial** (in the form of **New Beat**) was refreshed by deeply distorting a multitude of industrial-heavy kick drums. Early Rotterdam **Gabber** and the more well-known exponents immortalized by the famous Thunderdome compilation albums, were relatively slow (150 bpm), but soon these kick beats were accelerated to the fastest tempo in the world of music: above 180 bpm. At first **Gabber** was simply called **Kickhouse** or **Powerhouse** (due to its strong beats) but soon got renamed after one the first **Gabber** clubs: “De Van Gabberhal”. **Gabber** is a Dutch word meaning “buddy” and the word stuck, as a fitting reference to the conciliating vibe at such parties. This must come as no surprise, with endless availability of empathic XTC. Consumption even increased and was joined by methamphetamine pills. Loose sportswear, training jackets, short or bald haircuts, and a specific type of ultrafast, feet-pounding dance called “hakken”, showcased the consequences of such high consumption of stimulants. But the essence of **Gabber** could be seen as the substitute for all these aggressive appearances and heavy drug use. In its core it is the most loyal genre to the general Hardcore credo: going completely berserk and providing the ultimate relief from any kind of stress.

### [1994] Happy Hardcore & Bouncy Techno
In the Dance hit charts of the early nineties, **Eurodance** and derivative forms reigned supreme. Eventually, even **Hardcore** became influenced, or – the other way around – **Eurodance** songs were turned into a **Hardcore** version: the catchy synth melodies were extremely sped up to around 180 bpm (which made them sound rather cheesy), old skool piano sounds (or ringing chimes) were added, and accelerated male (rap) verses and female chorus vocals filled in the remaining parts.

**Happy Hardcore** was a true parody of **Gabber**, a satire taken to the extreme, with children’s merchandising, colorful teen compilation CD’s, and even children’s parties, where Happy Hardcore was played all the time. Without a doubt, **Happy Hardcore** was despised by many of the “serious” **Gabber** Hardcore community, for which the genre was not only a commercial sellout, but a threat to their culture. They were right, as in one way or another Happy Hardcore already marked the end of the **Gabber** culture, though it would still take a couple of years. More often than not, DJ’s were repelled and intimidated when playing **Happy Hardcore**. Although in some clubs or parties these genres could be played alongside each other without any fuss, allowing for interesting fusions and crossovers.

**Happy Hardcore** formed a parallel stream of **Hardcore** alongside **Gabber**, with successent subgenres such as the almost identical **Bouncy Techno**, the frivolous Spanish subgenre **Makina**, and finally the more serious **UK** and **Freeform Hardcore**.

### [1996] Speedcore, Frenchcore & Terrorcore
Welcome to the world of Extreme **Gabber** (or Extreme Hardcore). Despite what one would expect, this is not a pleonasm. The grip **Gabber** had on the world of **Hardcore Techno** was so strong that both genre names are used synonymously, and fragmentation into subgenres was bound to occur.

The first big one, **Terrorcore**, expands on **Gabber’s** imagery and content of apocalypse and horror (reminding of **Heavy Metal**). Skulls, blood, steel, and dark colors match the synthesized, sharp sounds of **Terrorcore**. **Terrorcore** is often even faster than **Gabber**, sometimes reaching 300bpm. It tries to install fear and terror in the listener by dark synth basslines and aggressive, military-like vocal samples, which explains its synonyms **Doomcore **and **Stormtrooper**. Heavy distortion is not uncommon as well.

After **Terrorcore**, a new problem child gets born, one that is much harder to take seriously: **Speedcore**. **Speedcore** is so fast that there are barely any other adjectives to describe it. Any description of sound gets lost in the ultra acceleration of **Gabber** beats. Because **Speedcore** is all about speed, the only way to introduce variation is going even faster: a childish BPM race ending in the record holder subgenre **Extratone** (1000bpm+). In this final frontier, beats succeed each other so rapidly that a single tone is all that remains.

In France, another subgenre known as **Frenchcore** gains popularity with a far more distorted, grittier sound and a “moderate” tempo (to 200bpm). **Frenchcore**, **Terrorcore** and **Speedcore** (alongside other, lesser known Hardcore subgenres) became independent hardcore schools that would gain their own club rooms or party stages.

### [1997] Digital Hardcore & Breakcore
By the end of the nineties, it became rather difficult to create original, experimental electronic music. The so called “Big Boom of EDM” quickly saturated the spectrum of dance genres. **Breakcore**, **Raggacore** (**Ragga**-influences), and Digital Hardcore (Rave influences) could be seen as successful attempts to stick out of this: with their catch-all, indiscriminating nature. Digital Hardcore and Breakcore are heavily influenced by **Industrial Noise** Music, particularly **Power Electronics**. Sometimes **Breakcore** is also known as **Noizecore** or **Noisecore**, but this is highly confusing as the same term is being used for very different subgenres of **Grindcore** or **Metalcore**.

Any combination of noise and genre could come to mind (even Classical music) but the core always consists of extremely fast (the very limit of what is technically possible) drum rolls with arrhythmic, unpredictable, disorienting breaks and harsh sound effects. Add your typical **Jungle** subsonic bass and some powerful **Gabber** kick beats (matching the insane tempo) and you have the most chaotic attempt imaginable to wreak havoc and destruction upon any listener’s brain.

### [1999] UK Hardcore & Freeform / Trancecore & Acidcore
At the end of the nineties, the “happy” sound of **Happy Hardcore** had gone stale and predictable. In the UK, **Happy Hardcore** traded its happiness and formal structure for something rougher and free. **“UK Hardcore”** basically is the survival outcome of **Happy Hardcore**: stronger, faster, harder, and less happy. The type of music went really well with **Trance**, merging into a new type of music: **Freeform Hardcore** or **Trancecore**. Just like **Trance**, different channels of melodies, sound effects, and basslines are part of the music, and all of the songs are instrumental.

Because **Trancecore** fuses **Hardcore** with **Trance** it is very similar to the fusions of either **Acid (Trance)** or **Psytrance** with **Hardcore**, respectively known as **Acidcore** or **Psycore**. The connection between these two subgenres is unsurprisingly the heavy use of the TB-303, which becomes explored (or even abused) in every possible way, and is no stranger in the world of **Trancecore** either. Therefore, all these genres are one big bowl of acid and spacey speedy **Hardcore**, as if **Rave** never died.

### [2000] Hardstyle (& Jumpstyle)
**Hardstyle** develops when a group of friends tries to recreate the original, casual feeling of old skool **Gabber** without the explicit reference towards the genre (read: the negative connotation). **Hardstyle** becomes a success, not the least due to a larger appeal by women. **Hardstyle** started in Rotterdam, Netherlands, where it is also known as **Hard Bass**.

**Hardstyle** is a massive genre, incorporating tons of songs, composers, and multiple subgenres. Though still largely underground, **Hardstyle** has survived since its birth and still has a strong fanbase. The probable reason for this popularity is a good combination of the appealing factors of EDM’s heaviest genres: **Gabber**,** Hardtechno**, and **Hard NR**, which makes **Hardstyl** a flexible jack of all trades with **Techno**, **House**, **Trance**, and **Hardcore** influences (as long as it’s ultra hard and loud). The “slower” tempo and abrasive sounds of **Hardtechno** (compared to **Gabber**), the focus on synth stabs and vocal samples of **Hard NRG**, and the typical distortion on kick drums or melodies of **Gabber**, are the key ingredients of Hardstyle’s spicy melting pot.

After a few years, a very popular subgenre known as Jump or **Jumpstyle** arrives. **Jumpstyle** becomes a brief hype when even mature, common people and parents start “jumping”: a bouncing dance, similar to hakken but slower and less intense. Afterwards, **Jumpstyle** fused with **Hardtek** and becomes **Tekstyle**: a genre that is still in its infancy but quite promising.

### [2002] NU Style (Gabber) / Mainstream Hardcore
In 1998 Gabber went on the decline due to much negative publicity. Gabber starts to reject anything to further widen the gap with what they call “mellow”: all other, softer type of music and its corresponding subcultures. Appeal from hooligans, fascist subcultures, a steep decline in female followers, and ever increasing, heavy amphetamine and MDMA use killed the genre that was ironically named after friendship.

Despite all odds, a new wave of Gabber producers resurrected their favorite genre, while learning from the past. In 2002 the first Nu Style Gabber records appear, which are more technical and complex due to more professional hardware and software. Influenced by the recent and popular Hardstyle, a slight touch of melody and vocals is added, while also lowering the average tempo. All these elements make Nu Style more accessible to the average listener than early Gabber. By perfecting the fastest and hardest Dance genre, Old Style and Nu Style combined became so large and prominent within the super-genre of Hardcore, that the term Hardcore is almost synonymous with Gabber. Therefore Nu Style is also dubbed Mainstream Hardcore. It even reached Japan, where the genre became quite popular and known as J-Core (obviously very noisy, but also more melodic). Often Nu Style incorporates flangers as the main synth melody, which give it that harsh, berserk Rave feeling, washing over the crowd, feeding the brain, and preparing the body…to destroy everything.
