## House
- [[1984] Chicago House & Garage House](#1984-Chicago-House--Garage-House)
- [[1986] Acid House](#1986-Acid-House)
- [[1989] Ambient House/Chill-out](../master/downtempo.md#1989-Ambient-HouseChill-out)
- [[1989] Hip House & Eurodance](#1989-Hip-House--Eurodance)
- [[1993] Deep House](#1993-Deep-House)
- [[1993] Dream House/Trance & Ibiza House/Trance](../master/trance.md#1993-Dream-HouseTrance--Ibiza-HouseTrance)
- [[1994] Progressive House](#1994-Progressive-House)
- [[1996] Tech House](#1996-Tech-House)
- [[1996] NRG, Hard NRG & (UK) Hard House](../master/trance.md#1996-NRG-Hard-NRG--UK-Hard-House)
- [[1998] French House / Funky House](#1998-French-House--Funky-House)
- [[2000] Microhouse / Minimal House](#2000-Microhouse--Minimal-House)
- [[2005] Ghetto House, Ghettotech & Juke](#2005-Ghetto-House-Ghettotech--Juke)
- [[2006] Electro House & Dutch House](#2006-Electro-House--Dutch-House)
- [[2007] Fidget House & Complextro](#2007-Fidget-House--Complextro)
- [[2007] Nu Disco & Funktronica](../master/rnb.md#2007-Nu-Disco--Funktronica)
- [[2010] Moombahton](#2010-Moombahton)

**House**, daughter of mother **Disco**, is the stereotypical feel-good dance floor music with a steady beat. The most important word in the previous sentence is “feel-good”. **House** sets itself apart from other **Dance** genres by providing groove and soul. **House** is digital **Rhythm ‘n’ Blues** with a feeling of playfulness, warmth and compassion. Without her focus on positive vibes, she becomes another super-genre.

The revolutionary rise of **House** (and later **Techno**, **Hardcore**, and **Trance**) was accelerated by synergetic circumstances. Number one: new drum computers and electronic music instruments emerged in the early eighties, which made music making affordable for a single person and even possible without education. Secondly, the discovery of XTC as the perfect party drug, finally accepted by the masses thanks to more powerful beats and an escapist non-stop club (disco) culture. Thirdly, the shocking spread of AIDS, which decimated the homosexual community in the early eighties and spread a wave of fear. Because of this, **House** music became a substitute for sex, as casual sex was deemed too dangerous. As the matter of fact, the gay crowd preferred to hang around longer in clubs (instead of going home with a partner) and engage in sexual dancing, sweating, teasing, touching and losing itself on XTC (and other drugs) in the music. All this led to longer parties, longer DJ sessions, harder beats, more ecstatic sounds and the search for a musical substitute for pleasure: this is **House** music. Even though **House** has taken on many forms throughout history (whether it turns to **Pop**, **Electro** or **Disco**), the universal language of pleasure and joy (completely void of political or personal message) is always present. This universalism and happy escapism explains why **House** is still the most popular EDM super-genre today, always receiving the main stage or room in favour of other Dance music.

**House** is defined by a steady straight 4/4 drum beat, ranging somewhere between 120 and 130 bpm. **House** has a pronounced kick drum on the quarter beat of the bar, which is defined as a “four to the floor” rhythm. Of all Dance genres, **House** diverts the least of its average tempo (123-125bpm), which makes it easy to mix different records. A warm, soulful bass groove or **R&B** influences are other stereotypical **House** components.

The name **House** is derived from the Chicago based club where the genre originated: the Warehouse. This musical phenomenon quickly became common phrase: “Do you have the music they play down the ‘House?” It is however questionable if this name would have stuck so well if it didn’t symbolize a whole lot more: Unity – Love - Acceptance. As Chuck Roberts shouts over Rhythm Control’s “My House” in a paramount vocal sample of electronic music history: “[…] once you enter my House, it then becomes our House and our House music. And you see: no-one can own House because House music is a universal language, spoken and understood by all.” **House** became a synonym for tolerance: the urban soundtrack of the black, the gay, the bohemians and the outcasts.

**House** can be divided into three large waves, each consisting of multiple subgenres. The first one harbours the pioneering American genres (**Chicago**, **Garage** and **Acid House**), which could be called **Classic House**. The second wave is a diverse collection of styles that emerge once House sets foot on the European continent, like a diaspora of House (**Prog**, **Deep**, **Funky**, **French** and **Euro-House**). The third and final wave has a distinct sound from previous genres: **Electro House** and derivative genres (**Electro House**, **Complextro**, **Moombahton**, **Big Room**). Lately, **Electro House** has run its course and a rising interest in **Classic House** such as **Nu-Disco**, is noticeable. As always in the world of popular music, history repeats itself and with strong popularity of outlying genres **Trapstep** and **UK Bass**, the question remains what House’s Revenge will be.

### [1984] Chicago House & Garage House
The gay discotheques of Chicago (mainly for black males) already had a history of long, decadent, hypersexual parties before 1984. But suddenly the scene changed into something even more intense: the **Disco** four-to-the-floor beat got more pronounced, most of the lyrics disappeared, and offbeat hi-hats, synth basslines and pianos took their place. King of **Chicago House** was the TR-909 drum computer, endlessly pounding even harder kick drums than before at the popular rate of 122-125bpm (not too fast, not too slow). The combination of a rather slow EDM tempo, a deep and rich **R&B** bass, diva vocals (usually) and tickling piano melodies culminated in a tingling, all-night-long dance sensation, intensified by XTC. Although Ecstasy already existed during the sixties and the flower power age, it wasn’t until the coming of music that was hard enough (i.e. **House**) that it became popular (although cocaine and LSD were also common in early **House** culture).

In New York, the same story happened but with more elements from **Soul** & **Gospel**, called **Garage House** or **US Garage**. New York House DJ’s, such as the legendary *Larry Levan*, mixed more **Ambient** music with **House**, which shaped **Garage House** during its long-lasting evolution. Its roots can be traced back to the late seventies, even long before **Chicago House**. **Garage House** is named after the club in New York where it originated: the Paradise Garage.

Although **House** seemed like a sudden revolution, it really wasn’t. It was just another step in the ongoing evolution of Disco-debauchery, with **Italo-Disco** and **Hi-NRG** being the intermediate steps. The main difference with **Disco** however, was that **House** was here to stay. **Chicago** and **Garage House** never lost their appeal and today they remain floor fillers, because for many the original recipe still tastes the best.

### [1986] Acid House
Originally, Acid House was strongly tied with other **Classic House**. In fact it was not much more than **Chicago** or **Garage House** with the added distorted sound of the infamous TB-303 bass synthesizer. These early, isolated examples of **Acid House** were known as “Jack Tracks”, which was also the name for the first and most famous **Acid House** record label (Jack Trax). By looping a certain note and then distorting the resulting wave (by cutoff, resonance or envelop), the characteristic and psychedelic “acid sound” was created, which could be used for basslines, melodies, or synth stabs. It was called “acid” for its resemblance to the distorting sound of auditory hallucinations on the drug LSD, also called “acid”. This sound became so popular in the entire world of Dance music, that **Acid House** soon was a well-established genre on its own.

In 1987 the first (affordable) electronic samplers arise, which become heavily used in the world of **Rap** and **(Acid) House**. **Acid House** starts to incorporate **Rap** elements (**Proto Hip House**) and becomes a hyperactive and epileptic bricolage of samples. This moment is the start of the Rave culture, which skyrocketed after the Second Summer of Love in Ibiza (also in 1987) and became immortalized by the yellow smiley symbol.

But the paramount trademark of **Acid House** is a severance with **House’s** **Disco** influences and the corresponding gay and hipster subcultures. In **Acid House**, there is no longer a warm groove, no **R&B** feel, but harsh and distorted sounds onto a loud four-to-the-floor beat. All of the sudden, **House** becomes something even white British **Post-Punk** artists can relate to, being rough and revolutionary. Though these evolutions were incidental, the consequences were unimaginable.

### [1989] Hip House & Eurodance
The European version of **Classic House** incorporated **Rap** and **Techno** elements to create a one-size-fits-all genre that was both extremely commercial and popular: **Eurodance**. In Europe, it was simply called Dance, and later better known as “the sound of the nineties”. It must be noted that **Eurodance** is rather a large collection of different subgenres than a single well-defined one. The earliest subgenres are **House** influenced **Rap** songs known as **Hip House** (a good example of this is “Young Mc – Know How”) and side-projects of **Techno** producers within the world of **House** (such as Kevin Saunderson’s production of “Inner City - Big Fun”). These early “Technodance” songs evolved together with **Hip House** and Rap-influenced **Acid House** into the stereotypical **Eurohouse**, **Eurodance’s** primary exponent.

Almost all **Eurohouse** is composed in a formal, predictable structure consisting of three alternating parts: male rap verses, female diva choruses and a super catchy **Techno/House** synth melody. All of this on top of a continuous pumping and more pronounced **Chicago House** beat. Later, various offshoots such as **Bubblegum Dance**, **Handbag House**, **Italo Dance**, and **Anthem House** provided slight variations. But they were rather the evidence of a hype overdone and a sign of the commercial greed of background producers, often feuding about royalties and plagiarism.

But these negative aspects remain merely side notes next to **Eurodance’s** positive vibe: in the early and mid-nineties, during a period of high prosperity and at the dawn of the new millennium, the hyperactive and euphoric music of **Eurodance** was the herald of even better things to come for a youth that was already overwhelmed by its messages of freedom, love, and pure bliss.

### [1993] Deep House
A strong and undefeated house within the family line of House is **Deep House**, the somewhat opposite counterweight for **Eurodance**. **Deep House** has an endless appeal by going back to the primary Roots of **House**: **Philly Soul**. Fusion instruments (Hammond organs, electric pianos) give **Deep House** a funky, warm sound, while **Philly Soul** and **Garage House** arrangements provide a steady dance rhythm. That’s why **Deep House** is sometimes referred to as **Jazz House**. The most typical characteristic of **Deep House** is a total absence of climax and lyrics; the music is one long mix of groovy **House** beats. After **Deep House**, the closely related genre **Funky House** emerged; a more **Funk** than **Soul** oriented variant. **Deep House** forms the opposing pole of a polarized **House** universe: ambient and soulful versus hard and sharp, which has turned both sides into love-it-or-hate-it styles. **Deep House's** average tempo is slightly slower than **Chicago’s** (120bpm) and often features downtuned or downsampled sounds, which sound like they are heard underwater. As such, **Deep House** submerges the listener in the groovy waves of soulful **House**. It is not there to blast relentlessly impulses into the brain; it is there to party all night long without excesses.

### [1994] Progressive House
**Progressive House** evolved out of the smaller subgenre **Tribal House**, the most percussion-heavy type of **House** with prominent beats and exotic instrumentation. Hereafter, the first wave arrives in 1992: long, slightly psychedelic tracks also with lots of hyper-rhythmic percussion and primarily UK based. Highly confusing, this new genre was sometimes called “Trance” at the time, as **Trance** hadn’t established itself as a super-genre yet, and (because of the emphasis on a repetitive rhythm) also (much later) mistaken for **Techno**. Remarkably, **Progressive House** had a backdoor entrance into the realm of **New Wave** / **Post-Punk** / **Madchester**, thanks to the British approval of **Acid House**, which inspired bands with a **Rock** background like *Leftfield* or *Underworld* to switch sides and create pure Dance music.

The second wave of **Progressive House** takes hold around 1996-1997. Percussion and bass becomes heavier, but not more complex. Dynamic range also gets toned down, with all the sound frequencies lying closer together. Songs become even longer and are more often the work of relatively unknown DJ’s instead of album-oriented bands, aimed at long, progressing DJ-sets. This second wave was mainly the reaction on another **House** subgenre: **Handbag House**, which is a soft, female oriented, lightweight type of **Eurodance** in the mid nineties. Clearly the opposite in sound, **Progressive House** tries to please its target audience of white, adolescent, straight males with its never-ending easy-to-mix pumping sound. And it worked due to a certain notion of sophistication and technology, though its name discloses rather an air of condescension.

### [1996] Tech House
**Tech House** is exactly what you would expect: a go-between of **House** and **Techno**. The sound of **Chicago/Deep House** is remixed on top of a minimal **Techno** beat in hyperclean, digital productions. **Tech House** has no famous hits or anthems: it is a massive abundance of DJ-targeted records specifically made for mixing. This is because it’s the safest Dance music any DJ can play as it never strays too far into one category or another. It’s not too melodic, catchy or ecstatic to be straight **House** so it can be easily mixed and dissolve as a continuous beat in the background. Neither is it too rhythmical or minimal to be pure **Techno**. **Tech House** features more distortion (often on the kicks), shorter sounds, more pronounced snares, and less warm/more digital synth melodies than regular **House**. It is however more structured than **Techno** and often features vocal samples or more eclectic influences.

### [1998] French House / Funky House
**French House** started almost simultaneously with its sibling **Funk House** genres, **Deep** and **Funky House**, in the late eighties. It wasn’t until the late nineties though, that many **French House** producers broke through internationally. Being much less ambient and soulful than **Deep House**, **French House** was more attracted to the futuristic visions of **P-Funk**. But more important was **Eurodisco**, which had a lasting impact in France on Dance music thanks to the regional subgenre **Space-Disco**. Ever since **Eurodisco** arrived in France (around 1987), the build-up to **French House** was already tangible, but to people abroad the music felt revolutionary. This means spacey **Synthpop** sounds, a highly danceable nature, and “Electro” effects (such as robotic filter and phaser melodies; the trademark of **French House**). **French House** uses many references in song names or artwork to science-fiction and space. **Funky House** and **French House** share a great deal of overlapping. Around 2000, **Funky House** becomes more popular but both remain well liked among many. **French House** is another example of popular music’s continuous return to its own history, using the past to shape the future.

### [2000] Microhouse / Minimal House
**Minimal House** and **Microhouse** (the same but more extreme) are different from **Minimal Techno** in that they don’t minimize the quantity of the sound (i.e. the number of layers) but rather the quality of the sound. Nothing may be too distracting or too explicit. Therefore melody or groovy basslines are almost non-existent. Sounds are often compressed, extreme low or high frequencies cut off. Experimental minimalistic sounds (blips, cuts) are more likely the core of the music instead of ambient sound effects. The result is a weird and extremely repetitive soft **House** rhythm on top of a soft beat. Sometimes it seems like the record has been stuck or the music hasn’t really begun yet. It’s definitely experimental music that requires a certain mental approach to adore. **Minimal House** has a large influence from **Glitch**, after all. The genre originated in Berlin, but afterwards Amsterdam becomes the epicenter. Just like **Minimal Techno** formed a strong backlash against the second wave of Rave, so is **Minimal House** actually a backlash against the third wave of Rave: **Hardtrance**. With a fairly low tempo and a focus on subtle drops and sounds, it is clearly the inverse of chainsaw-booming **Hardtrance**.

### [2005] Ghetto House, Ghettotech & Juke
A lesser known **House** subculture that has been around since 1992 but only started blossoming at the turn of the century, is **Ghetto** or **Booty House**. In Chicago, the **Classic House** scene started mixing with the **South Rap/Miami/Booty Bass** scene. This happened primarily in the southwestern parts of town, home to a poorer **Rap** and **Electro** loving ghetto community. The end result of this fusion was music shaped to its environment: a dirty, gritty, unpolished **House**; minimalistic but with a small handful of **Electro** sound effects. It’s not uncommon for the genre to feature Rap lyrics as well. Pitched down vocals, often in call-and-response manner, make Ghetto House or G-House a “bone-dry” genre.

Soon afterwards, **Detroit Techno** received a similar “dirty overhaul” to create **Ghettotech**, with a stronger influence from **Miami Bass**. And much later (around 2010) the popular subgenre **(Chicago) Juke** shows that the scene is far from dead. **Juke **is a further development of **Ghetto House** with syncopated percussion and a much faster tempo. This even leads to its own unique, fast dance: Footwork.

Because these genres form a bridge between **House/Techno** and **Rap**, it’s not surprising that **Ghetto House** starts to influence new **Rap** genres, and thus turns **Trap** into **Drill**.

### [2006] Electro House & Dutch House
In the first half of the new millennium, **House** was almost on life-support. The global conquest of **Trance** and **Rock’s** reclaim as the dominant popular music genre banished it into the shadows. Yet in the darkest of times, **House** turned the tables by redrafting its own definition. It became what is more commonly (though wrongfully) known as “Electro”, by merging **Electroclash** with **Tech House** and shaking off its characteristic warm, **R&B** based groove. Indeed, **Electro House** is harsh and cold in comparison, due to dirty, distorted but basic sawtooth synth melodies and a large focus on an incoherent climax. Said climax consists of a heavy bassline, that is intensified by postponing with a tiny bit of silence. This is known as a “drop”, a musical technique which got transferred in many other types of music, especially **Trapstep **and **Post-Dubstep**. **Electro House** is also defined by minimal use of percussion and an average tempo of 130 bpm.

However, **Electro House** can be used as an umbrella term as well for all **House** genres that are directly influenced by it. The biggest and most deviant (**Moombahton** and **Glitch House**) are mentioned separately on the Carta. Three other and more similar to early **Electro House** are included here. The first one, **Dutch House,** is closely related and rather a second wave of **Electro House **as both genres originated in the Netherlands. Starting in 2008, **Dutch House** aka “Dirty Dutch” or “Bleephouse” has high pitched synths, bleeping sounds, intricate percussion, and less focus on bass.

Around 2010, another **Electro House** subgenre arrives: **Big Room (House)**. As one of the most despised genres by music connoisseurs, **Big Room** seldom finds it way into genealogies. With its predictable maximum-gravity drops and over-the-top bombastic **Electro House** anthems, critics define this style as extremely shallow, monotonous and commercial. The immense popularity of typical **Big Room** festivals or parties proves that the genre – clearly love-it-or-hate-it – cannot be shuffled away.

And finally we have **Melbourne Bounce**: a niche-genre of **Electro House** with acid and **Jumpstyle** influences. All these genres (Electro House XL) belong to a family of Dance music catered to the masses that in more recent terms (regrettably) has been dubbed “EDM”.

### [2007] Fidget House & Complextro
**Electro House** has a tendency towards snappy, glitchy, and fidgety sounds. A tendency that gets stretched further by the lesser known “Glitch House” genres: **Fidget** and **Complextro**. **Fidget (House)** Incorporates **UK Garage** elements to create glitchy beats and Rave elements for synths stabs, while chopped vocals take their cue from **House**. **Fidget House** was very shortlived and rather obscure, starting as a small experiment (actually a joke), but it gained more popularity than expected.

After 2010, **Fidget House** fuses with **Post-Dubstep** into a more “complex” music genre with an average tempo of 130 bpm: **Complextro**. **Complextro** (meaning: complex Electro (House)) uses drops which feature multiple synths mixed with various samples, but always glitchy and short. Not only the samples, but also the wobbly basslines are snappy and cutting. All these elements give **Complextro** a restless feeling, a sense of hyperactivity, similar to **Fidget House** but rougher and worse.

### [2010] Moombahton
In a time of music genre saturation, new genres are often invented by the unexpected fusion of two remote, distinctive genres. **Moombahton** is such an example: **(Dutch) Electro House** meets **Reggaetón**. Thus **Moombahton** is actually a form of House music, but slowed down and filled with **Reggaetón** sounds and rhythms, until it is barely recognizable as such. The name “Moombah” comes from the first conceived track. **Moombahton** is syncopated beat-heavy club music, with a natural summer feeling. Although the tempo is incredibly low in the world of EDM (100-110BPM), the party doesn’t slow down when **Moombahton** is around. **Moombahton** is loved for combining heavy drops, hooks and beats with shrill synths just like you find in **Trapstep**, **Dubstep** and **Dutch House**, but without taking itself seriously. It’s the funny sidekick of contemporary Dance. Songs are often very short, indicating that they are mostly used for a quick taste of the drop and main synth melody, after which another **Moombahton** track is unleashed. Moombahton’s House/Breakbeat/Jamaican melting pot often crosses over into **Dubstep/Drum’n’Bass**, creating the subgenre **Moombahcore**, but particulary into **Trapstep**, creating **Trapahton**. These subgenres are good examples of how **Trapstep**, **Post-Dubstep**, **Electro House** and **Moombahton** (the “heavy drop”-genres) have become so intertwined after 2013-14 that there is actually very few music that belongs strictly to one genre; the majority falls in between.
