## Industrial
- [1970] Krautrock
- [1975] Avant-Garde Industrial
- [1979] Gothic Rock & Deathrock
- [1982] EBM
- [1982] Noise Music
- [1984] Dark Ambient/Dark Industrial
- [1985] Darkwave/Coldwave
- [1989] Industrial Rock/Industrial Metal
- [1990] Electro Industrial/Aggreppo
- [1999] Futurepop

Industrial is a genre in between Rock and Electronic music. It evolved out of the German post-war underground scene in the seventies, and has been experimental and obscure ever since. Gothic music, following out of “Post-Punk Depression”, shares many characteristics with Industrial and both subcultures have become intertwined into a state of Siamese twins. Author John Savage outlines five different aspects of Industrial music that show a great deal of insight into this rather secluded genre: organizational autonomy, access to info, use of synth and anti-music, extra-musical elements, and shock tactics.

The first one - organizational autonomy - can be traced back to the roots of the genre’s name: Industrial comes from Industrial Records, the first Industrial record company and more an extreme experiment than a real enterprise. The name however is no coincidence: early Industrial criticizes contemporary art by going either backwards (dark retro/industrial age) or forwards (dark cyber/futurism). Musical references to factory and industrial life (noise, machines) strengthen Industrial’s name. Industrial however does not follow any rules but likes to create the illusion of a heavily organized machine, with visual references to totalitarian regimes such as strong logos, artwork in black-red-white, and band names that are conceived as unstoppable movements on their own. Special fashion subcultures that combine “industrial” looks with either futuristic or retro aesthetics such as “Steampunk” or “Cyberpunk”, enrich modern Industrial subculture, and are sometimes mistaken for music genres.

Industrial is also keen on introducing synth and anti-music (read: noise) into its songs to create the atmosphere of retro-futurism or even more appropriately “techno-paranoia”, reminiscent of American novelist William S. Burroughs. The song structure of Rock gets combined with the sound effects and instrumentation of electronic music, specifically Downtempo, Techno, and Trance. Industrial has a slower, hypnotizing tempo compared to Rock and a pronounced, perfectly regular (almost in a military fashion) rhythm that pounds throughout most Industrial tracks. This has led to the implementation of the word “Techno” on many Industrial genres, such as “Technoid”, “Dark Techno”, “Cybertechno”, and so on. But Industrial is nothing like Techno: there is no groove or soul within, only a dark, pulsing force that is torn and tortured by its own resourceful consciousness.

The forth aspect of Industrial, extra-musical elements, concerns visual art and fashion, but most importantly performance art. Industrial culture is known for its extravagant music concerts. The earliest music shows in the seventies already explored the outer limits of what is morally acceptable on stage and then leapt far and wide over these limits. Not only on stage but also in cover art and lyrics, shock tactics are being used by Industrial: references to fascism and Nazism, torture, self-mutilation, deviant sex, and psychotic, disturbing imagery or voices, all intensified by the dark and heavy sound of Electronic Rock. But Industrial is anything but fascist; the music holds a mirror to those who wrongfully believe so and teaches how people are easily manipulated by media and the visual. Industrial is a philosophical meta-genre, which is why it values access to info.

Industrial has always believed that music is unable to change the world. Yet it tries nevertheless, resulting in a schizophrenic identity of aggression/noise versus melancholy/depression. This ironic paradox explains many of its characteristics and why few understand and appreciate the music. But more remarkably, is what makes Industrial unique among super-genres: the fact that it has managed to survive all this time while staying practically completely underground (the odd Industrial Rock superstars excluded). The reason is a steel subculture: strong and durable and more important than a technical common ground. Indeed, when one listens to Noise Music or Early Industrial and compares this to Futurepop, the difference can hardly be larger. But as long as there is something repulsive about contemporary society, Industrial, regardless of style, has a reason to exist.

### [1970] Krautrock
In the period ensuing World War II, German culture and especially music had been looking for a new identity. Determined to create the most original, innovative and unique music ever invented, a handful of German bands got to work, drawing influences from almost equally experimental **Progressive Rock** groups. When the first commercial synthesizers were released, they were the vanguard to exploit them in any way imaginable and thus releasing electronic music onto the masses. Typically German, the result was **Prog Rock**, but with electronic influences and based on a repetitive and mechanical sound called “Motorik”. Motorik gave **Krautrock** a sterile sound due to a complete absence of acoustic elements. By using this motorik, **Krautrock** introduced a slow song progression reminiscent of Minimalism and avant-garde Downtempo, instead of traditional **Rock** structures and solos. Influences from **Psychedelia** were also welcomed by German bands, with which they shared a love for experimentation. **Krautrock** is actually a derogatory term by the British Press. In Germany, Krautrock’s lengthy “Electro-Psy-Prog-Rock” songs were more appropriately known at the time as Cosmic (Kosmischen) Rock. With their mythological and cryptic band names, **Krautrock** bands formed the perfect prelude for **Space Rock**, which finally evolved into **Stoner Rock**.

One band however, chose a far more radical path than others by abandoning all Rock influences. *Kraftwerk* made the first completely electronic music that had recognizable structure, melody, and bass. With *Kraftwerk* as arguably the most revolutionary popular music artist of all time, **Krautrock** is one of the most influential genres, bridging the gap between Rock and Dance.

### [1975] Avant-Garde Industrial
**Krautrock** didn’t stop. It changed and expanded drastically into an independent culture, later to become a whole group of music genres. However, the first wave of Industrial (or Early / Avant-Garde Industrial) is by far the most experimental genre. A conceptual artist scene taken to the extreme, where eager avant-gardists tried to be as provocative as possible: totalitarian iconography/cover art, disturbing /psychotic imagery and lyrics, and using every trick in the guitar and synth book to create a repetitive but incoherent collage of factory sounds (hence industrial) with distorted and false mumbling and minimalistic melodies. Even (Free) Jazz becomes an inspiration if it helps upscale Industrial’s perturbation. This is a genre that would sound no different than unbearable, psychotic noise for the vast majority of people: music as torture. The overwhelming majority of Industrial music (as a super-genre) comes from Germany: an unfathomable legacy of and a powerful testament to the grand experiment of Krautrock.

Early Industrial draws heavily on influences from Modernism and Dadaïsm, believing in tearing down society and building it up again. Industrial likes to refer to recurring themes of constructivism, machinery, industrialization, and world order: we are all gears in the clockwork of society. More than any other music genre, Industrial seeks out the bigger philosophical issues, yet does not delivers answers - only a shock treatment the likes one has never heard.

### [1975] Gothic Rock & Deathrock
The realization that **Punk Rock** didn’t change the world and never would, pushed a small number of **Post-Punk** groups towards a more depressing, nihilistic sound. It was a bad trip of edgy **Rock ‘n’ Roll** one could call dark acid punk rock, with a touch of industrial. While **Gothic Rock** (sometimes known as **Dark Punk**) pioneers simply tried to create a unique rock sound fitting for the age of despair and economic crisis, the music inspired a well-known, broader subculture: Goth. Strongly tied to dark art, melancholic poetry or literature, nocturnal themes and the color black, Goth is as unhappy and despairing as possible. Especially dark romantic tales from the 19th century such as the works of Edgar Allan Poe, were a big influence on **Gothic Rock**. The subculture of Goth evolving out of the music (but not the artists themselves) would influence new Gothic artists into becoming more electronic and sinister, leading to Darkwave.

The London Post-Punk scene developed around the same time a very similar genre, but with more themes from death and the macabre: **Death Rock**. The Bat Cave club in London was the primary operating base for these new artists, awakening in the night as Punk vampires.

### [1982] EBM
Music. Without. Emotions. Full Stop. More mechanical, more electronic and more repetitive than industrial, but without the noise and arty obsession for the bizarre. This is almost military music with a sort of robotic aggression. With hard striking and kicking beats, **EBM** manufactured the first prototype for Electronic Dance Music. **EBM**, short for **Electronic Body Music** and also known as Industrial Dance, was the first industrial genre to produce some sort of vocals (though very atonal) that could actually be understood or made any sense, which made it far more accessible than its counterpart genres (Gothic Rock was not bound to Industrial culture yet at that time). The dark, monotonous beating sound became an important influence on other dance genres and artists, since House and Techno weren’t invented yet. This was especially true for that other Belgian phenomenon: **New Beat**. EBM also influenced **Synthpop** and the other way around because these were the only true digital genres in the early eighties (though they came from very different paths). Even after the full-blown European expansion of **House** and **Techno**, EBM remained an important and distinctive genre; especially in Germany where it gradually faded but not without influencing the whole of Industrial music.

## [1982] Noise Music
**Noise Music** can be an incredibly broad genre name, incorporating any kind of music that harbors some sort of noise. Here it is only used as the so called “Noise Music Scene” which is a separate school of Industrial music emerging in the early eighties. At this point the Industrial scene was taking a more dance oriented approach, with both EBM and Electronic Industrial (Proto-Aggreppo) emerging as either more repetitive or melodic evolutions. The opposite direction – strictly noise, by any means possible – brought forth a Post-Industrial wave of noise-related subgenres lasting until the present.

The amount of subgenres, barely discernable for the untrained listener, is stupefying: Power Electronics, Death Industrial, Experimental Industrial, Technoid, Power Noise, Drum ‘n’ Noise, Japanese Noise, and more. Japanoise, J-Noise, Harsh Noise or Noisecore (arguably the most important subgenre) started as a vague umbrella term for anything noise related from Japan but gradually formed into a defined genre with its own subculture. Noisecore employs extremely sharp and harsh sounds, instead of the deeper and the more subtle tones of German Industrial.

Noise Music obviously has strong ties with the noisiest music genres: **Breakcore**, **Digital Hardcore**, **IDM**, **Noise Rock & Pop**, and **Gabber**. It is this quest for music that no-one might like, as a nemesis of mainstream, that gives testimony to the saturation of possible music genres.

## [1984] Dark Ambient/Dark Industrial
Reminiscent of Karlheinz Stockhausen’s epic “Gesang Der Jünglinge”, **Dark Industrial** can deliver lengthy compositions (some over 20 minutes long). It’s nigh impossible to separate Dark Industrial from related genres Dark Ambient (aka Isolationism) and Ambient Industrial as they all consist of the same eerie atmosphere; sometimes beautiful but often downright frightening and disturbing. A minimal soundscape of the past resurrected with typical industrial sound effects and techniques, in which haunting and gloomy sounds (often repetitive in nature) form the foreground. In the background one regularly finds a stream of heavily distorted noise. The difference with Early Industrial lies in a less noisy/experimental approach and a more ambient/atmospheric one. Dark Ambient is your typical graveyard ruin by night soundtrack, or the sound of a monochrome forest echoing through a picture from the past. It’s no surprise that this genre is often used in horror films or scary game soundtracks. Out of Dark Ambient an important subgenre in the late eighties arises: Ethereal (Dark)wave or Neoclassical Wave. Ethereal Wave becomes a big thing in France, where spooky French hushes or weeping voices are added on top of melodramatic classical music infused with Dark Ambient elements. The result is the ultimate Gothic music and a further strengthening of its relationship with Industrial.

## [1985] Darkwave/Coldwave
After the heydays of the few early **Gothic Rock** pioneers, the Gothic movement took their legacy and started creating darker, more melancholic music with haunting synth melodies, drum machines, and **Post-Punk** guitar riffs. The introvert lyrics were typically about Gothic (romantic) topics. This darker form of **New Wave** (usually it was more **Post-Punk** than **New Wave**) was called **Darkwave**. **Darkwave** emerged in Germany as a second wave of **Gothic Rock**. It merged with **Synthpop**, and thus became much more electronic.

**Coldwave** on the other hand, is a much more complex story. To the American press, **Coldwave** is very heavy, guitar based Darkwave and a predecessor of Industrial Metal (such as bands Chemlab, Hate Department or 16 Volt). In Europe (especially in France) **Coldwave** is known as a minimal, Gothic type of **Synthpop**. We will use the latter definition, which might sometimes be labeled as **Synthcore**, though you should not confuse this with the other (Hardcore) **Synthcore**.

**Darkwave** and **Coldwave** encompass all Goth music from the late eighties until present. Together with **Electro-Industrial** and **Industrial Rock** it would form a musical trinity as the music of choice for the underground but undying industrial subculture.

### [1989] Industrial Rock/Industrial Metal
A wall of electronically amplified Hard Rock / Metal riffs (to the maximum) blows you away with angry protesting singers that were born to be enemy of the state. This is Industrial Rock/Metal: a music style that’s so loud and uncompromising in its own nature that there actually is no difference between Industrial Rock and Metal (though some would disagree), and that makes you realize that Hard Rock really isn’t that hard. The fusion of Rock and Industrial was bound to happen, as both always were closely related to each other via Krautrock.

The first wave of Industrial Metal bands such as Ministry and Godflesh, was more oriented towards Rock than electronic music, and featured ultraheavy droning riffs alongside an affinity towards chaos/noise. A number of later bands, who also focused on the theatrics of their performance and visual aesthetics (costumes, video clips, extravagant shows) changed that sound. Industrial Metal (aka Aggro-Industrial) evolved into a more electronic and driven sound, with use of sequencers and more synth. In Germany, a specific movement known as the Neue Deutsche Härte (New German Heart) emerged with a more stoic appearance and polished production (though still equally as loud as other Industrial Rock). These bands were responsible for familiarizing Industrial to a larger audience, yet this never seduced the artists of walking down a path of predictability and political correctness. When this new kind of music broke through, it created a small shockwave, catapulting the obscure and alternative Industrial scene into mainstream with major label superstars filling arenas. Because lots of people seemed to crave for the heaviest music possible but with that extra touch of synth.

### [1990] Electro Industrial/Aggreppo
The second wave of industrial was quite different from the first one: instead of a revolutionary movement, it was going-out music for the deep underground industrial nightlife. This was the first true Industrial Dance, though it is more commonly known as “Aggreppo” (Aggressive Pop). Electro-Industrial mixed all Industrial genres onto an electronic pounding beat, which resulted in a sort of “Dark Anthem Techno” with both haunting female vocals and sinister whispering or mumbling male vocals. Electro-Industrial makes it seem as if the dancefloor is controlled by lust-craving vampires and intimidating inquisitors. Sado-masochism, torture, bondage and pornography are in fact common themes of Electro-Industrial. Deeper, darker, and more layered than before, Electro-Industrial channels an aura of dominance and power, the universal denominator of Aggreppo. Electro Industrial also started Industrial’s common theme of “Futurism Noir” or dark sci-fi. A theme referred to by the recurring prefix “cyber”, such as Aggreppo’s alias: Cybertechno.

Some artists take the ruthlessness of the music to the extreme and combine this with atonal vocals and the pulsing rhythm of EBM. This has led in the mid-nineties to a popular subgenre: Aggrotech (aka Terror EBM or Hellektro). Aggrotech is a bold and traumatizing combination of EBM and Aggreppo with sharper and abrasive sounds. Aggrotech is arguably one of the most extreme music genres and a prime example of Industrial’s (successful) ambition to create anti-music.

### [1999] Futurepop
**Futurepop** can be seen as a subgenre of **Electro-Industrial** or as an evolution of it (i.e. something new). The latter is being preferred here. Although it is one of the smallest and least known genres on the Carta, **Futurepop** illustrates once again an interesting link between Industrial and Trance. This has happened before, when hard EBM beats found their way into the earliest forms of **Goa Trance**. Futurepop is as much Pop as **Aggreppo** is Pop, meaning it is barely true Pop at all. It is however a much cleaner, more produced type of Electro-Industrial, with no distortions, scary vocals, or obscene themes. This genre focuses on dark but beautiful melancholic synth melodies and powerful synth basslines, which can recollect and crossover to (dark) Trance (though regularly at a lower bpm). Futurepop can mirror a lot of Darkwave because the latter is Gothic Synthpop, where the former actually is Industrial Synthpop. **Futurepop** is the perfect soundtrack for anything sci-fi or futuristic: completely electronic and dark, but crystal clear. This is not instrumental music like Trance; equally melancholic vocals about bombastic, biblical topics (future oriented) mark this genre as a highly thematic one.

### [2006] Minimal Wave/Synth & Minimal Industrial (Revival)
This forgotten subgenre is the hipster’s ultimate fusion: the avant-garde mentality of industrial made (barely) danceable by **New Wave** synth melodies before the genre became mainstream.

There are three waves of Industrial that brought the genre as a whole to life. The first one was an obscure experiment of the seventies that would lead to many other genres (**Avant-Garde Industrial**). Fifteen years later, the influences of these genres alongside Synthpop, modern Rock, and the Goth movement, culminated in an all-round, perfectionized genre that would fuel the Industrial subculture for a long time (Electro-Industrial). Another fifteen years later, in the era of recycling and uncertainty, a revival of purist, minimal Industrial / Darkwave was needed, that briefly existed in the early eighties right before MIDI was introduced to New Wave (sounding quite lo-fi). Minimal Wave aka Synth Wave (not to be confused with Synthwave) is closely related to Coldwave and the Neue Deutsche Welle: a German form of Synthpop that is more ambient and minimal than usual. Minimal wave therefore is a very dark and amateur type of Synthpop, with lots of emphasis on modern artwork and conceptualization. As **Electroclash** returned interest in **Synthpop**, so rediscovered Industrial culture Coldwave and Minimal Wave and blended these genres with early Industrial sounds.
