## Jamaican
- [[1951] Mento](#1951-Mento)
- [[1960] Ska](#1960-Ska)
- [[1965] Rocksteady](#1965-Rocksteady)
- [[1968] (Roots) Raggae](#1968-Roots-Raggae)
- [[1970] Dub](#1970-Dub)
- [[1972] Lover's Rock & UK Raggae](#1972-Lovers-Rock--UK-Raggae)
- [[1978] Ska Revival (2-tone), Ska Punk & Skacore](#1978-Ska-Revival-2-tone--Ska-Punk--Skacore)
- [[1980] Dancehall](#[1980-Dancehall)
- [[1985] Ragga](#1985-Ragga)
- [[1991] Reggae-Fusion & Bhangramuffin](#1991-Reggae-Fusion--Bhangramuffin)
- [[1994] Reggaetón & Latin Rap](#1994-Reggaetón--Latin-Rap)

Jamaican music is regrettably often reduced to its most popular export **Reggae**. **Reggae’s** international appeal quickly surpassed the threshold which defines world music. This becomes very clear when compared to the music of neighbouring countries like Cuba and Haiti. But there are more Jamaican music genres that all have become more popular than world music. What is even more important than their popularity is the fact that Jamaican music creates a critical shackle between Rock, Rap and Dance. Almost all Jamaican music genres share certain characteristics which not only give them a very distinguishable sound but also explain the tremendous influence on other genres, particularly British ones. As Jamaica used to be a British colony until 1962 (which is after the rise of Ska), the import of Jamaican music into the UK has always been thriving (like the cargos from the infamous Trojan record label for example).

Jamaica had no radio stations at all let alone music television. The only way for Jamaican public to enjoy music they didn’t have to buy themselves, was by attending local “sound systems”: very large, mobile stereo systems with different types of speakers and turntables. To supply these sound systems with records, there were recording studios everywhere. Therefore, Jamaican music is focused on recording, not performing. Live gigs were virtually non-existent and vinyl reigned supreme. It is no wonder that many pioneering recording and loudspeaker techniques were invented in Jamaica. Because of sound systems, Jamaican music is made to be played outdoors (with the exception of Dancehall). This is particularly noticeable in the dedication (mainly amplification) on the drum and bass parts. Unsurprisingly, Jamaican music has always been extremely popular at festivals abroad, which helped Jamaican music popularity move forward.

The Jamaican culture of record producing and spontaneous sound systems has been around as long as the music itself, i.e. even as early as Mento. This means that Jamaica also introduced the concept of the DJ long before Eurodisco and EDM. The “Disk Jockey” or record player is known as the “Selecta” or selector. The DJ works together with the “MC” or “Master of Ceremony”, who does the “toasting”: Jamaican slang for adding live vocals. The MC also provides “peps”, which are speedy vocals in a Jamaican dialect (that may sound like gibberish) to pep up the crowd, later annexed by Drum ‘n’ Bass. In the beginning the Selector and the MC was one and the same person, but as these two occupations became separated from each other, their respective responsibility increased. Sound systems expanded as well, evolving in more than just a big piece of equipment. They became a treasured relic for a posse of involved artists and technicians. Such sound system posses regularly held battles against each other, to see who had the best records, mixing skills, or toasting talents. More often than not, these battles escalated in a hail of violence: imagine two neighborhood street parties of feuding families shooting at each other.

Another characteristic of all Jamaican music is a strong emphasis on the offbeat. This gives the music a laidback sound, ideal for warm outdoor weather and smoking marihuana. Indeed, cannabis – cultivated on Jamaica itself – is also partly responsible for the way most Jamaican music sounds, although its influence on the genre must not be exaggerated.

Besides all technical elements that define Jamaican music, there are other elements which have become a custom overseas, leading to Jamaican or Reggae subcultures in various other countries. Jamaican colored artwork (red-yellow-green), similar fashion, or dreadlocks as a haircut for example. Dreadlocks were originally a Rastafarian symbol of spirituality, rebellion, individualism and proudness of race (as dreadlocks are something other races cannot so easily obtain). Jamaican music after all is more about non-conformity and originality than anything else. Jamaicans only play what they like. If it is not how they want it, they alter it. If it stops being made, they make it themselves. If it doesn’t exist, they invent it. Unfortunately, the island has ceased to produce any truly original genres since Ragga. Yet one would do well to keep a close eye on any music it brings forth.

### [1951] Mento
All Jamaican music didn’t just appear out of thin air of course. A long and diverse culture of (European and African) Folk music already existed on the Island. This slowly led to the first real popular music genre: **Mento**. **Mento** was mostly Calypso (a Latin genre from Trinidad & Tobago) with **R&B** influences. Because Jamaica forms a junction between American, Latin and other music, **Mento** featured a whole plethora of different instruments, sounding more chaotic than harmonic. The most important thing however, were the unique lyrics; singers didn’t sing but spoke in a rhythmical and improvised way on top of the music, which was called “Toasting”. These “toasts” would much later be a major influence on Rap and Drum ‘n’ Bass. **Mento** can be regarded as a Folk music genre instead of a popular one, but being the pioneering Jamaican music genre, it makes sense to include it. **Mento** artists liked to think of themselves as a part of aristocracy, because the country was still a British colony in the fifties. This is shown in nobility titles such as Prince, Lord, Count, Duke, and King, which became a bit of a tradition in Jamaican music. After **Mento**, “Bluebeat”, a New Orleans based type of **Rhythm ‘n’ Blues** named after a record company, paves the way for **Ska**.

### [1960] Ska
**Ska** really put the Jamaican music scene on the map. The nearest American city, New Orleans, brought its own version of R&B (Bluebeat) to the island where the sound was drastically changed. Sound effects like echos and advanced electronic instruments like turntables and sound systems (e.g. the famous Channel 1 and Cocksone Campbell systems) made this possible. The R&B rhythm of Bluebeat became accompanied by a marching beat, an influence from Rock 'n' Roll. Although there are (African) vocals, Ska (like a lot of Jamaican music) is more about the sound and feeling: optimistic, serene and peaceful. Blissful Jazzy riffs, horns and staccato guitars are the main tools to achieve this. Ska is also known for its large brass orchestras (10-20 people) dominating the music, whereas bass is rather simplistic with accent on the offbeat.

When Detroit Soul and Philly Soul started to eclipse New Orleans Soul (Southern Soul) and New Orleans Blues, Ska experienced a sharp rise, as the Jamaican public - fond of the Crescent City’s music - was forced to take matters in their own hands. This happens simultaneously with the independence of Jamaica in 1962, providing a tremendous opportunity to create a unique and national sound for a new country. Ska becomes a huge success, accompanied by its own jagged, hyperactive type of dancing: Skank. With two subsequent and important ska-revivals (abroad), skank also receives an overhaul and gets picked up later by Hardcore Punk & Jump Up. For the sake of clarity, this genre is therefore pinpointed as the first wave of Ska or Jamaican Ska.

### [1965] Rocksteady
Right after the British Mersey Beat Revolution a small youth subculture, the mods, existed, that listened to their own type of mod Rock & Roll. Almost exactly the same happened in Jamaica after the **Ska** revolution: young gangsters and street kids (known as “rude boys”) changed the happy, uptempo **Ska** in something they could relate to: much cooler, slower music (influenced by **Soul**) with an easy but powerful bass and more **Rock** influences such as electric guitars (though sparse). This rude boy music became known as **Rocksteady**. And just as Punk, Rap or Mod, the lyrics were more often than not about political issues, although the music sounded nowhere near as rough, but was often performed in R&B-like small harmony groups. The reason for implementing political content and a slower, laidback and more serious tempo was a slowly growing discontent with the very first Jamaican government installed after the independence in 1962. Another reason for the slowing down of Jamaican music lay in the simple fact that many musicians just didn’t like to play **Ska’s** hyperactive rhythm. Particularly of notice for **Rocksteady**, is the famous Jamaican Tuff Gong Records label. Right before the rise of Reggae, **Rocksteady** led to a specific subgenre known as “Poppa-Top”, which had a looser and bubblier rhythm.

### [1968] (Roots) Raggae
The optimism for new and better governance was quickly waning, when Jamaican citizens realized they were not better off with independence than with colonization. During its infancy as a state, Jamaica failed to address the needs of the poor, especially in urban ghettos. These places became the breeding ground for a new, slower type of Rocksteady: “Reggae”. Embedded in the sunny, warm Caribbean climate of Jamaica and influenced by the abundant availability of marihuana, **Reggae** doesn’t sound as much reactionary as it is. But to this very day it has never ceased to question authority. Reggae exploded in 1972, thanks to both the 10 year anniversary of the country (and thus a decade of failed politics) and the film release of “The Harder They Come”, which made Reggae popular overseas.

The bass guitar became Reggae’s leading instrument, which dropped the first beat of a bar, creating the so called “one drop rhythm” which gives Reggae its characteristic offbeat sound. The rhythm staccato guitar moved to the background, but other Ska characteristics were still clearly audible. This Early Reggae eventually got claimed as the subcultural music of the spiritual Rastafari movement. Rastafari is a special Jamaican faith dating back as early as the thirties, which deals about many issues that are also attributed to Reggae: religion, racism, ghetto-life, cannabis use, African roots and more. The term “Roots Reggae” is either reserved for Reggae strongly expressing Rastafari beliefs and issues, or to distinguish the genre from other Jamaican music.

### [1970] Dub
The early **Reggae** composers probably never thought that Dub was going to be such an important and influential genre. Dub started out as instrumental B-sides or copy records of **Reggae** or **Rocksteady** records. Hence the word “dub” was derived from the name of a copy record: a dubplate (double plate). The original music is completely stripped down of all instruments and then rebuilt in the same way but entirely electronically and much, much slower. Dub features lots of sound effects, especially echo and reverb, and incredibly heavy subsonic bass designed to be played on typical Jamaican sound systems (which have massive bass woofers and air scoops to support Dub music). One of the main characteristics of Dub manipulation is delay, which is used on many different parts of the song and often in an extensive, panoramic manner. This gives Dub its typical “wah-wah” feeling where sounds seem to bounce back from the walls and never die. All these sound effects synergize well with cannabis, which strongly influenced Dub music (and continues to do so).

Because of its pioneering technology yet dreamy and surreal sound, **Dub** was an important inspiration for all kinds of music and remains a living stream in the contemporary world of popular music. In the nineties, **Dub** gets influenced by **EDM** instead of the other way around, and becomes the subgenre **Digidub** (digital Dub).

### [1972] Lover's Rock & UK Raggae
In the UK, commercial producers quickly saw the huge potential **Reggae** had to offer. **Reggae** had lost all its political and geo-sociological context once transferred to Britain and was regarded in first instance as a happy, worryfree type of music. Ironically quite the opposite of how it was conceived. By blending **Reggae** with **Soul**, a lightweight, poplike music was created that succeeded in becoming a successful hit chart genre: **Lover’s Rock**, which is also the name of a pioneering record label. It was called that way because almost all the songs were predictable love songs. Actually, it was more soft **Soul Pop** with a **Reggae** sound than the other way around.

But not all **UK Reggae** is sentimental, sugarsmooth **Lover’s Rock**. Most of it is simply the interpretation of British (white) artists on Jamaican music, without the religious and cultural stock-in trade and with small but various **Pop/Rock/R&B** influences: **Popreggae** aka **Reggae Pop**. **Lover’s Rock** and **UK Reggae** also found their way back to Jamaica and influenced a number of artists there. In the eighties and nineties, **Pop Reggae** gets more and more influenced by electronic music, leading eventually to **Reggae-Fusion**.

### [1978] Ska Revival (2-tone), Ska Punk & Skacore
During the years of **Punk** rebellion in the UK, an unexpected ally appeared as Rastafarians (Reggae) started protesting alongside Punks, united by their fight against reform and oppression. Punk and Reggae never merged, though Reggae’s influence is certainly noticeable in many New Wave records. Reactionary street Punk known as Oi!-Punk, was the result of UK skinheads looking for new music to dance to and they found it in **Ska** (not **Reggae**). Though Oi! Is sometimes associated with neofascist, racist and nihilistic subcultures, most of the Oi! skinheads picked up the appearance as a satirical protest against the new right-wing UK National Front Party.

The famous British label 2-Tone Records released a new series of British Ska artists, which lead to a large revival and the discovery of Ska in the US and the UK, nearly two decades after the genre was invented. Inspired by Oi! Punk, this second wave of Ska or Ska Revival got mixed up with Punk, but became also influenced by Thrashcore and Skatepunk and by the end of the eighties the formation of Ska-Punk was complete. The second wave of Ska changed Punk songs into uptempo, optimistic tracks with brass instruments, though still politically aware. Ska-Punk is also known as the third wave of Ska, keeping the spirit of Ska alive all the way into the nineties.

### [1980] Dancehall
A history of corrupt governments collides with the collateral damage of cocaine trafficking in the early eighties in Jamaica. Colombian cartels used Jamaica as pit stop between Miami and Colombia, which also spread the drug throughout Jamaica itself. Excessive violence, gang wars and passive governance coerced many Jamaicans to flee into escapist party music: welcome to **Dancehall** or in a lesser known but in equally apt terms: **Coke Reggae**.

**Disco** introduced the nightclub-party-culture around the world. Jamaica too had its own dancing clubs and discotheques, but DJ’s here stayed true to the native music. They took the rhythm from old sixties’ **Ska** records (because **Reggae’s** rhythm was too slow to party hard), the bass and sound of **Reggae** and influences from **Dance/Rock** such as the addition of rock drums. There was little left of the spirituality of **Reggae** though. This was in-your-face, secular and aggressive party music. Instead of drugs, God or politics, the lyrics dealt with so called “slackness”: explicit sexual and vulgar content. **Dancehall** also brought back the concept of toasting, which **Reggae** had abandoned. These types of vocals are much more fitting to both the sound and content. A new type of fashion to go along with the party phenomenon of **Dancehall** makes this more than just a music genre: combined with **Ragga** it is a well-established subculture of debauchery and escapism.

### [1985] Ragga
Ragga (short for “Raggamuffin”) is purely electronic Dancehall in overdrive. With the introduction of music computers, producers could create digital **Dancehall** rhythms with lots of bass and nifty sound effects, called “riddims”. Riddims had been around since the age of **Dub**, where they were known as the basic template of any **Dub** track, which is the stripped down part of the song with enhanced drums and beat (before sound manipulation). With the advent of **Ragga**, **Dub** riddims became accelerated and many more (speedy) riddims were created. A whole parallel collection of riddims - each with his own name - was used interchangeably with different **Ragga** songs (similar to how the same Surf Rock melodies were used for different songs and artists). After the selection of riddim, harsher and jagged sounds are added by the DJ and toasting vocals make up the work of the MC. **Ragga** is hyperkinetic rhythm, electrifying Jamaican dance music, unable to resist. And this is why it was a tremendous influence on later **Rave** and **Drum ‘n’ Bass** culture.

The very first **Ragga** riddim was called “Sleng Teng”, which is sometimes used as a synonym for **Ragga**. When it comes to lyrical content, the **Dancehall** slackness only got worse. **Ragga** MC’s, toasting over this booming digital **Rapreggae**, have no taboos whatsoever when it comes to sexuality, promoting (straight) sex as much as possible and sometimes getting into trouble with homophobic lyrics. The aggressive, often criminal, and homophobic behavior of **Ragga** diminishes strongly in the 21st century and **Ragga** starts to blend in with the “peace-and-unity” philosophy of **Reggae**.

### [1991] Reggae-Fusion & Bhangramuffin
In the early and mid-nineties the “End-of-the-Millennium” craze led to lots of ecstatic and optimistic mainstream music. Along with **Eurodance**, **South Rap**, **Happy Hardcore**, and more, **Reggae-Fusion** and **Bhangramuffin** scored high in the hit Pop charts. The former was a modern, electronic Rap version of Reggae music where the latter was the combination of Ragga and Bhangra. Bhangra, which is Indian Punjabi Folk music, was especially popular in the UK, where **Reggae** and **Ragga** were also an important and big subculture. **Reggae-Fusion** aka **Reggae Pop** is also partly the breakthrough of **Ragga** in a more commercial (read: western) environment. Some artists started as pure **Ragga** artists, but changed their sound into a more politically correct and lighter version. Because of **Reggae Fusion’s** success in the hit charts, many **Reggae** artists started to incorporate **Ragga** elements in their music. **Reggae Fusion** and **Bhangramuffin** originated in different ways, but the end result was quite similar: commercial, rhythmical, happy **Reggae** (a bit heavier) and **Ragga** (a bit softer).

### [1994] Reggaetón & Latin Rap
**Latin Rap**, a mixture of **Gangsta Rap** and Latin music, proved to be a successful cocktail. The mix of exotic breakbeat rhythms (filled with brass, congas or Latin instruments) and Spanish rap lyrics created an almost unrivaled tropical atmosphere and attitude of ‘coolness’. **Latin Rap** was far from slow and laidback but rather spicy and furious, meant to be played at max volume while cruising through the favelas and Hispanic ghettos. Instead of adding Latin elements to Rap music (what happened in the US), artists in Puerto Rico added American **Gangsta Rap** to their native music (mainly heavy Bomba and a bit of Plena) creating a whole new genre: Reggaetón (which has nothing to do with Reggae, but did get influenced by Dancehall). The result was similar to Latin Rap, but the rhythm was entirely based on Bomba with no R&B samples whatsoever, and the lyrics were even more explicit than Latin Rap. Reggaeton is based on the Ragga Dembow riddim, which uses the snare of a drum machine. The genre eventually made a surprising transfer to the world of Electro House, leading to Moombahton.
