## Jazz
- [1915] New Orleans Jazz & Dixieland Jazz
- [1926] Chicago Jazz
- [1930] Swing / Big Band
- [1937] Third Stream / Progressive Jazz & Modal Jazz
- [1941] New Orleans & Dixieland Jazz Revivals
- [1945] Bebop
- [1950] Cool Jazz & West Coast Jazz
- [1953] Hard Bop
- [1957] Soul Jazz/Jazz Funk
- [1959] Free Jazz/Avant-Garde Jazz
- [1970] Fusion/Jazz Rock
- [1975] Smooth Jazz
- [1988] Acid Jazz/Jazzdance
- [1995] Nu Jazz/Electro Jazz
- [2001] Nordic Jazz
- [2008] Electro Swing

**Jazz** is music performed by an ensemble of players, each (very) specialized and proficient in their respective instrument. The usual **Jazz** instruments are: trumpets, saxophones, clarinets, trombones, string-bass, and piano alongside drums and a jazz-guitar. The interaction between these players is crucial. Compared to **Rock** or **Blues**, **Jazz** musicians follow no completely predetermined scores. They have to “feel” what the others are about to play and how the music will evolve. Yes, there are chords and melodies forming an identifiable foundation for each song, but improvisation and instantaneous experimentation are never absent. In a way, true **Jazz** music can only be experienced live. Each performance is supposed to be different. **Jazz** therefore is part of a thriving nightlife subculture in (Jazz) bars all over the world. The difficult aspect of improvisation probably explains why **Jazz** of all the super-genres is the most (if not always) instrumental, experiments the least with sound effects and plays more with structure, patterns and rhythms, reminding us a lot of Classical Music.

Jazz provides an interesting combination of (lower class) African American folk music with (upper class) European amusement and classical music. As such, **Jazz** has never been as racially defined as **Blues** is and is undoubtedly laudable for bonding these subcultures. **Jazz** ensembles are divided in different sections: the rhythm section (bass, drums, and piano) provide a steady beat throughout the track, while the melody section (horns) plays the chorus altogether and afterwards separately with solo’s.

The precise origin of the word **Jazz** has been lost over the course of time. Three possible explanations exist, though none of them might actually be the truth. One suggests that the word is black slang for the ensemble. Another hypotheses tells us that its roots lie in an early Jazz band named “Razz” or an early musician named “Jazbo”. Or the name might also be slang for “Jasmine”, the most common perfume for prostitutes working in early twentieth century brothels (where Ragtime and Jazz developed).

The power of Jazz lies in its rich contrast: improvised versus predetermination, chaos versus control and light and gentle sounds versus sharp and shrill tones. Jazz is also unique in influencing many genres in a subtle manner. Although there are no immediate derivative genres coming from Jazz, countless ones have been influenced by it. Its unique concepts and instrumentation are versatile enough to transfer to the most diametrical of popular music genres.

Over the course of history, there have been attempts to divide Jazz into a small number of categories, which could have been super-genres in their own right. Names such as “Traditional or Post-Jazz”, “First, Second and Third Stream (Jazz)” have been viable options at one time or another, but hold barely any relevance in today’s styles of Jazz. One possible way to structure this whole is by using two pivotal moments - the birth of Bebop and Fusion - to divide the whole into three time periods: Classic Jazz, Modern Jazz and Post-Jazz (aka Post-Fusion or Free-Bop).

In the mid-seventies Jazz gets strongly repressed and overshadowed by R&B. Many American Jazz musicians migrate to Europe, where funded Jazz festivals and Jazz bars in historical city centres thrive better than in the States (particularly in Scandinavia and Eastern Europe). Currently, American Jazz education is on the rise, but general public interest has stayed off. Post-Jazz has therefore become a global and heavily dispersed phenomenon of a genre that once was the sound of a nation.

### [1915] New Orleans Jazz & Dixieland Jazz
The very first type of **Jazz** was played in the background of bars (barrelhouses), brothels, and cabarets by a small band. It first appeared in New Orleans thanks to the melting pot present of Ragtime, Haïtian Folk, Creole Folk and Country Blues. New Orleans was not only home to Dixieland marching bands and a main port for sea travel with Cuba, but a former French colony as well. Cuban music, French music, and marching bands all heavily influenced Jazz, making it one of the most diverse musical stews.

The music was not rough and emotional like **Blues**, but balanced and reserved. The basic instrument ensemble for New Orleans Jazz is trumpet, clarinet and trombone; a very modest but complementary trio, filling all frequencies and improvising around each other. No instrument dominates: they all communicate and play out their melodies at each other in a counterpoint manner. The technique of counterpoint came into Jazz through Cuban Contradanza (or Habanera) music, which in turn came from French Contredanse. All three instruments also improvise collectively instead of separately, an important difference with later Jazz. Improvisation and experimentation were common in **Jazz** and stimulated by frequent marihuana use, as the drug was still legal in the U.S. during the 1910s and 1920s.

After a while, **Jazz** bands expanded and became performed by white artists, leading to a slightly different sound (more instruments) which is known as **Dixieland Jazz**, though the difference is negligible.

### [1926] Chicago Jazz
During America’s period of prohibition, Chicago became a very popular transportation hub, connecting various parts across the country. As the first true “city Jazz”, **Chicago Jazz** influenced (and got influenced by) many musicians, also Blues artists. Its importance however is rather modest compared to Chicago Blues. Where the Windy City proved beneficial in bringing different regional styles of Blues together, the upside for Jazz was more superficial as Jazz started primarily in one region. However, Chicago provided the possibility for numerous young white artists to come in contact with this unknown black music and alter it to a more “European” sound. Chicago Jazz has more changes in composition, includes harmonies and is densely textured with many solos. While the music became more convoluted, it also received a “windy” overhaul, with cold, harsh and grouching sounds, fitting for Chicago’s climate. The latter aspect has given Chicago Jazz the alias “Hardcore Jazz”. The genre remained somewhat popular, due to its stereotypical sound that combines the hyperkinetic with the lunatic. Because it is also one of the oldest Jazz genres, recordings are very lo-fi, adding to an already comical nature of Chicago Jazz, and often used much later in cartoons or slapstick films. Ironically there was no humor at the base of Chicago Jazz, only the unbridled ambition of white youngsters.

### [1930] Swing/Big Band
The gradual expansion of Jazz bands synergized with an increasing demand for escapist music during the thirties. After all, the world had just experienced its biggest financial crisis ever, where suicide was not out of the ordinary. Sheltering in the frivolous yet deafening sound of Big Band Jazz, man and woman, black and white alike, gathered in parties to deny the cold reality outside and experience this new craze: **Swing**.

Swing started with Jazz bands of ten instruments, but soon orchestras of 17 instruments became the standard; one can see that the phrase “big band” is not exaggerated. The setup consists of more reed and less brass instruments. String basses are also added. The music is very catchy, with call and response tunes, hooky riffs, and a 4/4 beat that makes it hard to stand still. **Swing** songs are highly structured compared to other **Jazz**. First the melody is played by all instruments. Then comes the vocal part with solos after which the chorus comes, consisting mostly of high notes.

The music was accompanied by its own dance, also called “Swing” or “swinging”, which has remained popular ever since. Related dances, such as Lindy Hop, were (and are) also commonly applied to Big Band Jazz. Remarkably, Swing became revived during the Second World War for an even greater moment of escapism. While enemy forces were bombarding the outskirts of the city, people partied and danced their worries away on the tunes of **Swing**, which could only be described as a Kafkaesque spectacle.

### [1937] Third Stream / Progressive Jazz & Modal Jazz
The whole of **Jazz** music is sometimes divided into three categories or “streams”: First there was Traditional Jazz (quite formal) which could be seen as the opposite of the experimental, second stream: Modern Jazz. The third stream was reserved for the type of Jazz that was neither, but a merging between Classical Music (particularly Chamber music) and Jazz.

Experimentations between these two genres existed long before Modern Jazz, so it wasn’t until 1957 that composer Gunther Schuller coined this ambiguous term. The quest for coexistence between classical music and a popular genre that was partly defined in its non-classical properties (such as improvisation) proved to be a slippery slope. Third Stream Jazz is certainly not a strong subcultural movement, but more a collection of experimental Jazz songs over the course of time. Obviously Third Stream songs are more intricate with longer and deeper progression (thus “Progressive Jazz’) than other types of Jazz, but when the avant-garde of the sixties invented Free Jazz, Third Stream’s relevance shrunk to absolute zero. Now, classical composers could learn more from Jazz than the other way around.

As a response, Third Stream’s definition was broadened to include crossovers to World Music, yet it remains one of the lesser known Jazz genres. A different successor at the end of the fifties, Modal Jazz, improvises on a series of scales instead of chords. Like the “Math Rock of Jazz”, Modal Jazz is defined (solely) by its highly technical, rational and mathematical structure.

### [1941] New Orleans & Dixieland Revival
**New Orleans & Dixieland Revival** is hardly a new genre, as the name implies. But - being listed in nearly every summary or genealogy of **Jazz** - its inclusion on the Carta is almost mandatory. Furthermore, the difference with the original genre is not zero. The success of **Swing** created a sort of nostalgia for early **Jazz** with small bands as many Jazz musicians were fed up with the predictable template of **Big Band** and its extravert performances. This back to the roots movement was almost strictly performed by white artists instead of the black bands of the original genre. Because of this minor racial difference **Jazz** became known by a much larger (white) audience, drawing many white aspirant players into **Jazz** and reviving the first “white Jazz”: **Chicago Jazz**. The **New Orleans & Dixieland Revival** is characterized by simple melodies and harmonies, another consequence of its backlash against **Big Band Jazz**.

### [1945] Bebop
Genres that grow too big eventually will fall. This was no different with **Swing**. Not only became it difficult to maintain such large, expensive orchestras, but more and more white people were copying the music. Though **Jazz** had always been less racially restricted than **Blues**, a number of black **Jazz** musicians felt a need to redefine black **Jazz** culture with a new, radical genre: **Bebop**. Their dissatisfaction is reflected in **Bebop’s** trademarks: frantic, chaotic and aggressive.

Bebop (or simply “Bop”) is one of the most revolutionary types of Jazz (and music). Why? Because it makes the music faster by making it slower. How? By stretching (thus slowing down) the tempo, a lot of silent gaps opened up between the beats. This free space could be filled in freely (improvised) with drum rolls, rhythmic breaks and superfast, harmonic melodies, usually in vibrato. Musicians also regularly imitate trumpet solos with their voice, leading to a new, fast singing technique called “scatting”. The word “bebop” itself comes from scatting, as it is as an often used onomatopoeia. The difference between **Jazz** from the past was so huge, that people eventually coined the term “Modern Jazz”, which later also included other experimental genres such as Hard Bop and Free Jazz.

Many wannabe Bebop musicians went downhill because they wrongly believed that heroin, which was very cheap during the forties, was an inherent part of Jazz culture. Their personal but also social problems (racism) illustrate the dark side of Bebop. This was no happy music, but the psychotic screams of struggling musicians, who didn’t care whether you loved or hated their music.

Around 1982, Bebop experiences a strong revival known as **Neobop** (or sometimes called Neo-Con (= conservative) Jazz). A lot of young Jazz scholars were not interested in the new possibilities of Fusion, and chose to concentrate on the old school (with influences from Free and Modal Jazz): straight, acoustic Jazz but rich and vibrant. A type of Jazz where they could show off their technical skills that would otherwise have been masked by the eclecticism of Fusion.

### [1950] Cool Jazz & West Coast Jazz
**Cool Jazz** is an evolution of **Bebop**, where the music is approached in a more rational, reserved and calculated manner: in a “cool way”. “Keeping cool” was an important part of the spirit of the fifties, after all. **Cool Jazz** emphasizes sound, trying to make each note as crisp and clean as possible by providing high contrast in frequency and tempo between its different sections. The use of counterpoint is common as well. Furthermore, the autonomy of notes is being stressed through solos (often many different solos at the same time). Overall, the genre appears as a lightweight and relaxed form of Jazz, yet heavily structured and complex, reminding of Classical music (which was a big source of inspiration). The perfect habitat for this smooth, calm type of Bebop is the laidback west coast of the US, which developed its own type of “Cool”: West Coast Jazz. **Cool Jazz** is mostly performed by white artists, with more influences from “white music” such as classical music. The genre experienced an early demise, lacking the passion and emotion of other (black) Jazz genres. Be that as it may, **Cool Jazz** remains the stereotypical background music for sophisticated jazz bars where intellectuals hold philosophical conversations till the wee hours of the morning.

### [1953] Hard bop
In an attempt to take back **Jazz** listeners that had turned to R&B, many (east coast) Bebop musicians changed their sound into something more accessible: **Hardbop**. **Hardbop** is a more modern evolution of **Bebop**, but not particularly “harder”, despite the term. The music is smoothened out and more emphasis is being put on the rhythm. The “Cool School” of the west coast had also provoked a certain disdain by Bebop players, with its exaggerated rationalism and lack of pathos. Hardbop formed the emotional answer but it in a very basic and gentle manner and not chaotic at all. Alongside these influences, the arrival of longplay records (at 33rpm) allowed for longer songs and longer solos. Numerous alternating solos and chords (of different instruments, sometimes even bass and drums) are being played in a call and response manner. Hardbop is played by small ensembles and is often described as heaving a more “bodied” or “textured” sound. Since its inception, Hardbop has been the dominant genre in Jazz. When Jazz is performed in Jazz bars or performances, it is highly likely to be Hardbop. There are two Hardbop subgenres: Funky Jazz (simple, with bluesy sound) and Mainstream Hardbop (more complex, closer related to Bebop).

### [1957] Soul Jazz/Jazz Funk
**Soul Jazz** is one of the smallest genres of Jazz. In fact it can be seen as an overlapping subgenre of **Hard Bop**. Its influence is extremely important however, leading directly to Funk (hence the alias Jazz Funk). As an eclectic, heavily R&B-influenced type of Jazz, it’s sometimes very hard to separate Soul Jazz from Fusion or Soul Blues, especially later recordings. Soul Jazz is music for a small Bebop band, with the addition of more rare Jazz instruments such as (Hammond) organs and tenor saxophones. These instruments create a thematic, smooth, relaxing sound that indulges the listener in a feeling of warmth and comfort.

Soul Jazz was created for a young, urban target audience that felt less connected with the more complex and chaotic styles of Jazz. The plain, downtempo, rhythmic melodies were easy to get into. Likewise was a continuous, repetitive bassline on the foreground, like a primitive version of the Funk groove. But most importantly is Jazz Funk’s credit as a forerunner of black civil rights in the US, alongside Modern Gospel. The alarming amount of white artists within West Coast Jazz circles, created a backlash of black artists taking up Jazz careers.

### [1959] Free Jazz/Avant-Garde Jazz
After the invention of Bebop on one hand and long play records on the other, the road lay open for highly experimental Jazz. Long, complex songs with lots of sound effects painted an impressionistic soundscape. Group improvisation was more important than ever, with Jazz bands playing seamlessly endless songs of which no-one knew how it was going to end. The Jazz player was set free from any rule or form: primal, freeform Jazz known as Free Jazz or even Avant Garde (Jazz) due to its highly experimental nature. Crossover experimentation emerged in the form of fusion subgenres such as World Bop (with world music) and M-base (with Funk).

Although Free Jazz already emerges around ’59, the accumulation of negative events in the sixties greatly shapes the genre (murder on JFK, Vietnam War, civil rights movement). American musicians responded to these events with atonal Jazz, based on sound experimenting and abstract structures. Amphetamine use infiltrated the world of Jazz as well, allowing for an even faster and more relentless kind of play. With no regular rhythm, no harmony and a large amount of speed, Free Jazz feels more chaotic than almost any other music genre. It is the musical translation of powerless screaming - shrills uttered without defense in a world that made no sense.

### [1970] Fusion/Jazz Rock
Acoustic traditional **Jazz** (also called Straight Jazz) reached its saturation point at the end of the sixties: due to its experimental nature almost every genre was already invented. Jazz had to cross over into the territories of the hottest music of the time: **Funk** for example, but mainly **Rock**. This powerful reinvention became so popular and well-spread, with many derivative genres, that it simply was called “Fusion”, although **Jazz Rock** is also a correct term. Fusion fuses traditional **Jazz** melody and rhythm and **Jazz** elements such as improvisation and complex interplay with **Rock** instruments (electric guitars, basses, synth), amplification, and simple harmonies.

The main structure was similar to **Free Jazz**, as once again, **Fusion** was invented by Miles Davis (who invented four different **Jazz** genres throughout his career). **Rock** influences came mostly from **Acid Rock**, although **Fusion** artists were also interested in **Progressive Rock** and during the seventies, there was quite some overlapping between **Prog Rock** of that time and **Fusion**. **Jazz Rock** marked the end of a Jazz Era (Modern Jazz) and the beginning of a new one (electronic Jazz or Post-Jazz).

### [1975] Smooth Jazz
The **Jazz** era after **Fusion** - also known as Post-Fusion, Post-Jazz, or Freebop – had to deal with the growing popularity and commercial approach of **R&B**, particularly Disco. As such, an offshoot of Fusion known as Smooth Jazz, became the favorite puppet of Jazz-related record companies, more profit-fixated than before. Experimentality became replaced by radio friendly, easy-listening music. Smooth Jazz aka Pop Jazz is supposed to sell - en large - with a slick, heavily produced and of course smooth sound. Jazz’s commercial direction is a striking part of the seventies “me generation”, where capitalist yuppies replaced naïve hippes. Of all different Jazz genres, it’s one of the plainest, with only one or two instruments playing melodies. Often there’s a saxophone, which is characteristic for Smooth Jazz’s (unintentional) erotic connotation: the music genre was a staple in erotic films or scenes during the late seventies and early eighties. After this period, Smooth Jazz also sparked reinterest in soft Pop music and paved the way for New Adult Contemporary (N.A.C). Critics, especially fans of classic and complex Jazz genres like Bop, describe Smooth Jazz as cheesy and predictable. Derogatory genre names like “Fuzak” and “Hot Tub Jazz” (New Age Jazz) reassert their opinions, while also holding a certain ground. After all, Smooth Jazz is often catered as background music for bars or restaurants or just to relax at home. Be that as it may, its overall popularity is still significant, because it delivers exactly what it promises: Easy-Listening.

### [1988] Acid Jazz/Jazzdance
**Acid Jazz** is a crossover genre gone too far: there is barely any **Jazz** left in it. There’s actually almost zero ‘acid’ about it as well, except a slight psychedelic sound, placing it high on the chart for poorly chosen genre names. In fact it’s more of the deepest funky Fusion combined with Rap, so Fusion Rap would be more appropriate. But the name is no error: Acid Jazz was a deliberate and firm reaction from the British Soul scene against the fiddling “nonsense” of Acid House. The leading record label – also named Acid Jazz – was determined to compensate Acid House with what they regarded as “quality music”, heavily influenced by Rare Groove records.

A steady Hip-Hop breakbeat, lots of percussion, Jazz harmonies and funky basslines (often with the aid of a synthesizer) are the key flavors of Acid Jazz. These elements blend perfectly until the roots of the genre are no longer traceable. It was a short but popular craze, right before EDM conquered the music scene. Due to its highly danceable nature, a new type of dance, Jazzdance, was invented along with it (which became more or less a synonym of the music itself). It can be hard to separate Acid Jazz from Jazz Funk with heavy breaks, if it wasn’t for the (abundant) use of vocals.

### [1995] Nu Jazz/Electro Jazz
During summer afternoons or evenings, in picturesque metropolitan suburbs (such as Saint-Germain, Paris), **Nu-Jazz** would be the ideal background music for any café terrace or coffee bar. It is electronic, melodic, playful **Jazz** with lots of soothing, ambient sound effects that wash over the gentle **Jazz** percussion like a warm summer breeze. Being made entirely electronic, it marked the end of the traditional **Jazz** band. All **Jazz** music from **Nu-Jazz** and forward – dominantly electronic and often home produced like EDM – is conjoined under the portmanteau “Future Jazz”. Future Jazz succeeded where contemporary Blues failed: renewing Jazz in the 21st century.

Nu Jazz, also known as Jazztronica, Phusion or Electro Jazz, can have a broad range of influences, such as deep basses from Ambient House or Deep House, groovy drum rhythms from Breakbeat, and exotic percussion from Latin genres. This makes Nu-Jazz a core genre (or the) of the second or electronic wave of Lounge, and it’s easily mistaken for Broken Beats or other Lounge genres. But these influences are subtle enough to not masquerade the fact that it truly is Jazz. Nevertheless, Nu-Jazz differs radically from older Jazz genres in means of production (solo and recorded versus live and in band) and its electronic sound. Hence, most Jazz enthusiasts regard Nu-Jazz rather as a rupture instead of a continuation within Jazz and encourage its classification among non-Jazz genres (Lounge, House, Breakbeat, Downtempo…). But in the realm of music, tradition is a bad advisor for survival.

### [2001] Nordic Jazz
The final chapter of **Jazz** is a shrouded one, rarely recognized as a defined genre. However, **Nordic Jazz** – the title of this chapter – deserves more recognition than it currently receives. During the seventies and afterwards, many American Jazz musicians hit financial rock bottom and were forced to flee to Europe. Especially in countries with a colder climate (such as Poland and Scandinavian ones) **Jazz** nightlife flourished well. As a result, Nordic countries already had a sustained culture of **Jazz** by the turn of the century, yet mainstream popularity stayed off. Because **Jazz** thrives stronger in these countries, **Jazz** education is also different and more extensive than the rest of Europe. Fresh classes of graduates attain critical acclaim each year, if – and this is a big if – they succeed in reaching national, let alone international, attention. Because more often than not, Scandinavian **Jazz** artists are so poor they cannot afford any publicity, leaving them in the shadows of anonymity. **Nordic Jazz** might seem vague, but artists share a number of common characteristics: gentle, ambient sounds, with slight, subtle influences from classical and world music.

### [2008] Electro Swing
Music history likes to repeat itself: after the financial crisis of 2008, **Swing** proved to be once more the pre-eminently escapist genre, just like it was during the Great Depression. Not only the music, but many aspects of the prewar-era of the thirties started to gain a renewed interest at the dawn of the ‘tens’: fashion, TV-series, dance, and of course music. Especially Swing dance and Lindy Hop courses and parties experienced a sharp rise. The optimistic genre of Swing received a small revival, but one that was clearly a different genre (not to mention a time window of nearly eighty years). The “electrifying” floodwave of **Electropop** and **Electrohouse** finally got a hold of Jazz. Certain solo EDM DJ’s took an interest in Big Band Jazz, recreating the original sound with electronic means and intermitting sounds, which makes it sound somewhat sharper, syncopated and chopped (like breakbeat). Electro Swing is sometimes regarded as a subgenre of Electro Jazz, but the two are fairly different. However, a certain degree of overlapping (also with related Loungetronica genres) should come as no surprise.
