## Metal
- [1970] Classic Metal
- [1974] Progressive Metal
- [1977] Power Metal
- [1977] Glam metal/Hair Metal/Pop Metal
- [1979] NWOBHM (New Wave of British Heavy Metal)
- [1982] Trash Metal
- [1982] Extreme Metal (Black I & Speed)
- [1983] Crossover Trash
- [1984] Doom Metal
- [1986] Death Metal
- [1986] Grindcore
- [1989] Stoner Metal/Rock & Sludge Metal/Rock
- [1990] Gothic Metal & Symphonic Metal
- [1991] Black Metal
- [1995] Nu Metal & Rap Metal
- [1999] Metalcore/NWOAHM (New Wave Of American Heavy Metal)

Although for most people **Heavy Metal** is (correctly) a harder and faster type of Rock, the genre is actually a continuation of “the Devil’s music”: **Blues**. After Metal’s experimental phase during the seventies (read more at **Classic Metal**), it lost a lot of its **Blues** influences and evolved rapidly into a variety of different styles. Two aspects of **Blues** have always remained however: lyrics about sorrow, nihilism, pain, tragedy, and a more concealed subtext revolving the Devil (though for **Blues** this was more a reputation than an actual theme). Heavy Metal expanded on these aspects in an obsessive manner. Death, destruction, corpses, zombies, Satan, pentagrams, evil themes, lots of black, torture, sharp and gothic artwork, and a hand symbol that both resembles the Devil’s horns and the letter “M”. These are the main elements of stereotypical **Metal** artwork/culture that have become so dominant that anything else is almost an exception to the rule. The visual language of **Metal** – a symbolism of anything dark or evil – transcends into corresponding fashion: black T-shirts with Metal artwork, black leather, wristbands with sharp pins, long sleazy hair, black jeans and of course: metal.

The term “Heavy Metal” describes well the two cornerstone aspects of the genre. It is heavy due to more amplification and distortion than Rock and it is also very “metallic”, meaning technical/rational. Heavy Metal is an overcharged engineer among genres, with highly technical unique elements such as blast beats, double bass drums, 12 string bass, lightning guitar solos and difficult voice techniques (grunting, falsetto, opera, screeching, etc.). Heavy Metal songs are usually longer than Rock songs, with more elaborate and diverse song structures. Without a radio friendly format, Metal has stayed clear from mainstream attention, although the genre is internationally well-known and connects fans across the most diverse of countries. Riffs are even more important than in Rock, and form the foundation around which many Metal songs are built. Many Metal riffs, especially early ones, make use of the Tritone: a musical dissonant interval of three whole tones that conveys a sense of restlessness. As such, the Tritone used to be associated with the Devil (Tritonus Diabolus in Musica Est) since the 18th century. What makes Metal appealing as well is a strong tendency for the theatrical. Metal likes to be bombastic to fortify its message (often of doom or evil), whether by classical elements, synth elements, more instrumentation, instrumental intermezzos, or elaborate intros.

“Heavy Metal” as a phrase can be traced back to Steppenwolf’s famous Hard Rock single “Born to be Wild”, in which the line “Heavy Metal Thunder” is mentioned: a quote from William S. Burrough’s book “Naked Lunch”. After all, Heavy Metal and Hard Rock were more or less the same in the early stages of the genre.

Heavy Metal is extremely popular within nerd culture. This is no coincidence: Metal is music for the analytical mind; it does not simply present itself but challenges the listener to carefully dissect the overload of mid- and low-frequency aural information. In order to absorb all of the music, Metal urges to re-listen at high volume. Because nerd culture has taken an interest in Metal, it has become one of the most defined, examined and structured super-genres, with a strong hierarchical genealogy and copious (over 50) subgenres, sometimes bordering on the ludicrous. Christian Black Metal, Pirate Metal and Viking Metal are such examples. It is only a matter of time before Ninja Metal gets invented, but until then, there is already plenty to explore within one of the healthiest super-genres and with one of the most loyal fan bases. Metal has considerable overlapping with Hardcore Punk, as both genres share a love for speed and heavy guitar music. Grunge is sometimes regarded as a part of Metal as well, but this has led to a backlash of German Metal fans, who swear only by so called “True Metal”: Metal without Grunge or other crossovers.

Although Metal culture is (just like Hardcore Punk) largely drug-free, the average alcohol consumption tends to be much higher than within any other music culture and certain genres (Folk Metal or Viking Metal) are conceived as the perfect music to be very, very drunk to. Combined with the special Metal “dance” of head-banging, Metal is far from an introvert genre – it’s meant to bring down the house.

### [1970] Classic Metal
Heavy Metal used to be an interchangeable term with Hard Rock in the late sixties. The earliest examples of the genre - Classic (Heavy) Metal - are often cited as Hard Rock examples and vice versa. As such, Classic Metal is a loosely defined genre: simply “Harder-than-Hard Rock”, mainly by means of more amplification and distortion. However, two British bands marked a turning point after which the schism with Rock was a fact: Black Sabbath and Led Zeppelin.

The shocking tragedy of four deaths and excessive violence at the Altamont Festival in 1969 marked the end of the flower power age, a temporary exile of the Rolling Stones and most importantly: a loss of belief in the hippy utopia. Rock couldn’t make the world a better place and everyone had witnessed the dark side of human nature: deep down inside man is evil. The first band to be influenced by this event was Led Zeppelin. Described at the time as Rock music being dark, heavy and gloomy, it was almost impossible to listen to. Black Sabbath developed an even slower, tuned-down sound, yet also full of distortion, with thick and heavy riffs. In their later work they also experimented with tempo and different instrumentation. Both bands feature lengthy songs, with elaborate guitar solos, while often referring to satanic or dark themes.

These early blueprints inspired Blues Rock and Acid Rock artists into a similar sound and style, yet over the course of time Blues influences became replaced by a pure metallic sound.

### [1974] Progressive Metal
A few Heavy Metal bands (eventually more and more) could not be classified within any existing genre. The metal community, more obsessed with genres and classification than any other music community, came up with progressive metal or Prog Metal. Yet it would be too easy to discard Progressive Metal as a residual non-genre. In the footsteps of Progressive Rock, Prog Metal bands experiment with long, elaborately structured songs and adding classical or exotic elements. They thrive to make Metal sound more intense, crisp and clean, yet unpredictable and non-formal. By doing so, Prog Metal also sounds somewhat less heavy and thus gained less appeal. Most Progressive Metal uses more sound layers or tracks than other Metal genres, accompanied by a steady rhythm. Prog Metal sounds like the delicate middle ground between **Power Metal**, **Gothic Metal**, and **Thrash Metal**. In this quest for metallic perfection, only a tiny handful of bands became known. The others remained shrouded in obscurity that they probably embraced.

In recent years, **Math Metal** has given birth to one of the newest and most peculiar of **Progressive Metal** subgenres: Djent. Djent is a Swedish Prog Metal subgenre based around a special technique of guitar strokes that sound like the word “Djent”. The term Prog Metal became also somewhat outdated in the 21st century, and thus the latest wave of experimental Metal artists became known as Post-Metal.

### [1977] Power Metal
Power Metal is a lesser known but properly defined kind of Heavy Metal that started in the seventies (particularly in Germany) and still has a dedicated fanbase today. **Power Metal** is not really heavy; first and foremost it’s high and fast. The lyrics often tell fictional fantasy tales about warriors, knights, dragons and whatnot and are almost always sung in a high pitched male voice. Furthermore the music is filled with melodies and drum rolls, building up and breaking down, like a rollercoaster ride filled with energy and enthusiasm. The difference between the speedy and guitar solo-oriented types of **Classic Metal** (of which **Power Metal** evolved, like e.g. early Van Halen) and **Power Metal** is that the latter seems to constantly maintain its high velocity and even higher frequency, as if it’s being overcharged with electricity. **Power Metal** is a genre that never really influenced other genres or evolved in another one. As such it remained a long-lasting parallel Metal stream, though easily eclipsed by the bigger Metal genres.

### [1977] Glam Metal/Hair Metal/Pop Metal
By the end of the seventies, the concept of **Glam Rock** got transferred to the world of Metal. **Glam Metal** went a few steps further though. Where Glam Rock tried to be mysterious and excentric, Glam Metal embraced the medium of television like a window for voyeurs. Long haired male bands (nothing new, but was a first for TV, hence the name Hair Metal) made commercial Metal songs with poplike feelgood tunes, to guarantee themselves some air time. Glam Metal was one of the few music genres that got played a lot during the first years of MTV, which further expanded the fame of these artists. Unfortunately this air (and concert) time was not used to promote the music but rather the private parts of the band. More often than not, Glam or Pop Metal is about sex or at the very least about macho and hedonistic themes. Initial protest was minimal though, as it was hard to take a band in black leather and excessive make-up seriously, plus it didn’t hurt the ratings either. Almost all famous **Glam Metal** bands were based in Los Angeles, where a glam subculture of stardom allures promiscuity and heroin abuse, paving the surface of Sunset Boulevard.

### [1979] NWOBHM (New Wave of British Heavy Metal)
When Heavy Metal was picked up in the UK, a lot of young bands were eager to make raw, energetic, revolutionary music on their own. On the one hand driven by a contempt for the popularity of Glam/Pop Metal’s commercialism, on the other hand by an urge to keep the British Punk legacy alive. These young bands gathered in garages and quickly formed a massive counterreaction to Glam Metal. By being (a lot) faster, louder, and tougher and with lyrics becoming more pessimistic and aggressive, they transformed Classic Metal into the New Wave of British Heavy Metal (NWOBHM) (although “Garage Metal” would also be a more suitable and descriptive name). The NWOBHM reinvented earlier Classic Metal and Hard Rock bands into a more metallic and edgier sound, and hereby shaping Heavy Metal into the characteristic sound it is most affiliated with. British Metal musicians molded Heavy Metal into the genre most people know, by showing off with bullet-speed riffs, screaming solos, and high-pitched vocals (though still lower than Power Metal).

After its arrival on US soil, the NWOBHM changed into Thrash Metal, while many UK based bands kept performing and stayed more or less true to their sound. The NWOBHM was a lot more swinging and sometimes even “poppy”, compared to later Thrash Metal.

### [1982] Trash Metal
What the NWOBHM did to Classic Metal, Thrash Metal did to the NWOBHM. American bands became hugely influenced by their British predecessors and decided to take it up another notch: the music became even faster and more drum and bass heavy (often involving a drum kit with two bass drums). Glam/Pop Metal made Metal too commercial and lighthearted. Thrash Metal was the answer. Besides aggressive, low-frequency riffs (which are sometimes fittingly described as “shredding”), hyperactive scales and arpeggios and prominent thrashing drum work are the most recognizable features of Thrash Metal. The overall song length also increases compared to NWOBHM, adding more complex song structures to the music. The genre quickly stood out amongst other Metal styles and soon a number of bands rose to international fame, known as the “Big Four of Thrash Metal”. These Bands - Metallica, Slayer, Megadeth, and Anthrax - helped spread Metal throughout the globe, from Japan to Brazil. Thrash Metal also displays a less friendly form of lyrical content. With nihilistic lyrics, often about anti-establishment, justice or war, Metal bands use just about anything to enforce a theatrical vocabulary. But like almost all Heavy Metal the message is rather cryptic than truly political. By the nineties, Thrash Metal’s popularity faded and a new subgenre “Groove Metal” (aka Groove Rock) came in to light. Groove Metal or Rock focused more on a rhythmic groove than simply bass. Yet Thrash Metal is still among the most widely known Metal genres and like any golden age, never truly dead.

### [1982] Extreme Metal (Black I & Speed)
The term Extreme Metal is rarely being used, as it is not a genre on its own, but a combination of two obscure but important genres: (early) Black Metal and (true) Speed Metal.

With the explosion of British and Thrash Metal in the early eighties, some bands realized the extreme potential Metal had to offer. Two similar genres became the product of experiments with Metal outside the regular comfort zone. A small number of these bands created dark, evil, atmospheric Metal (early Black), while others turned the energy and tempo of Thrash even higher, forging Speed Metal. Sometimes the term Speed Metal is reserved for early Thrash Metal, forming a sort of proto genre, or simply as a synonym for Thrash. In the strictest sense, Speed Metal is faster, and more melodic than Thrash. Lead guitarists display extreme craftsmanship in extensive virtuoso solos, playing ever more rapid than before.

Nevertheless, the first wave of Black Metal is barely slower than Speed Metal. Pioneering band Venom and their debut album that immediately named the genre, laid out Black Metal’s foundations: distortion, noise, feedback, chaos, shrilling/high-pitch sounds, velocity and satanic themes: a succubus screaming in agony. Black Metal marked a pivotal moment in Metal history. Now it was time to make truly evil music, and no longer just pretend to do so.

### [1983] Crossover Trash
Original Hardcore rapidly splintered into many important subgenres after its rise: the melodic Melocore, the ruthless Powerviolence, and the Punk fusions Crust-punk and Discore. Hereafter the natural fusion of two heavy guitar genres (Metal & Hardcore) led to a large, hard-to-define family of music, known as Crossover Thrash. Because the word Thrash is also an early synonym for Original Hardcore, Crossover Thrash actually has a two-way interpretation: Hardcore crossing over into Thrash Metal and the other way around. Within this aggressive whirlpool of genres, we find a new one: Thrashcore or Fastcore. Hardcore Punk became even faster, with even shorter songs, forcing the drummer to incorporate a new style of thrashing drumwork to match the insane tempo, called “Blast Beats”. Some Hardcore bands, such as Suicidal Tendencies and Bad Religion, created a faster type of music strongly linked to the Skater subculture. This early form or first wave of Skate Punk shared a lot of similarities with Thrashcore. Because many related bands experiment with all these genres (Skate Punk, Thrashcore, and both Thrash crossovers), their musical crossovers form an interesting, blurry mix of styles conjoined as Crossover Thrash; a noun often forgotten in favor of its more successful successors Grindcore and Metalcore. Crossover Thrash glorifies brevity: there’s not a moment to waste and even band names become abbreviated to signify a concentrated essence of purity and an acronym emanating power.

### [1984] Doom Metal
Classic Metal band Black Sabbath laid at an early stage (with some of their slower, more ominous songs) the foundations for a lesser known but influential Metal genre: Doom Metal. The utter despair found in their music (and which can also be heard in Gothic Rock) forms the key ingredient of Doom Metal. This is a genre that sounds the way one would expect: hopeless, lethargic and bombastic. Doom Metal often deals about the occult, whether in band names, track titles, imagery or lyrical content. The lyrics are often slightly howled, sometimes with echo, which remind again of Black Sabbath. It’s the slowest form of Metal, and one that came around at a time when Metal only seemed to want to go faster and faster (Speed Metal). A number of bands felt the urge to provide some sort of counterbalance. The lower tempo of Doom Metal leaves lots of room for silence between the ultraheavy sluggish riffs. Not all songs by Doom Metal bands are strictly Doom, some are quite fast and simply Heavy Metal, which would influence Stoner/Sludge Metal bands, as the only alternative approach for non-hyperactive artists. Alongside this evolution, Doom would also crossover with other styles resulting in a lot of different subgenres, such as Atmospheric Doom, Funeral Doom, Doom/Death and Dronemetal or Dronedoom. Modern Doom Metal also experiments with electronic techniques, often found in Ambient and Industrial music, which enhance its droning properties.

### [1986] Death Metal
**Death Metal** can be seen as the leading force in contemporary Metal. It has little to do with death (though the topic isn’t avoided), as it sounds more alive than anything else. In form it is similar to Thrash Metal but heavier, deeper, and with updated distortions/effects. Accompanied by extremely deep growling vocals (grunts), it is downright brutal and performed as if the artists are trying to shrug off intense pain. Being a vast genre with multiple subgenres, it would almost be appropriate to call it mainstream modern Metal. Many artists would disagree though, as one of its tendencies is to always push the boundaries (shifting away from “popular“ approval) and becoming even harder, faster, stronger, and more reckless.

The first (US) wave of **Death Metal** in the late eighties, was an even faster continuation of **Thrash Metal**. Because guitar velocity had become so high, Metal drummers developed a special hyper fast drum technique, called “blast beats”. This wave was very rough, unpolished, and with little melody – almost a feral form of Metal, which later strongly influenced Grindcore during its development.

The second (EU) wave of **Death Metal** aka **Melodic Death Metal** happened in the nineties and particularly in Sweden, which is why it’s sometimes referred to as (the New Wave of) Swedish Death Metal (NWOSDM). The second wave is a lot more melodic than the first one, with more synth influences and different (sometimes instrumental) passages throughout the music.

Apart from (and overlapping with) these two large waves, Death Metal has numerous subgenres, indicating the versatility and popularity of the genre. The most important ones are the self-explanatory Brutal Death and Tech(nical) Death, alongside crossovers such as Death Doom and Deathcore.

### [1986] Grindcore
Soon a new genre emerged in the world of Hardcore, even faster than Speed Metal (or anything else). Grindcore is arguably one of the most extreme genres in the world of music. It is characterized by maximum-speed, ‘grinding’ buzzsaw guitars, bursting lyrics and special, hyperspeed repetitiveness and machinegun-like drum kicks (known as blast beats). With its non-defined song structure and maximal distortion and speed, Grindcore could appear as the ultimate protest genre, but it has lost this essence in its pursue for provocation and extremity. Almost all Grindcore tries to be as gory, shocking and politically incorrect as possible, leading to subgenres with dubious names depending on subject matter such as Pornogrind and Goregrind. Although Grindcore did not originate from (the first wave of) Death Metal, both genres share much resemblance in their sound experimentation and their love for lyrics about pain and have been influencing each other during their respective evolution.

### [1989] Stoner Metal/Rock & Sludge Metal/Rock
When Space Rock (a more Metal oriented continuation of Psychedelic Rock) encountered the slow, marching, and almost hypnotizing rhythm of Doom Metal, a match was made in heaven: Stoner Metal. Stoner Rock or Metal received large appeal from sedative and hallucinogenic drug users, which explains its name. Influenced by (psychedelic) drugs, this kind of Heavy Metal featured heavy sluggish riffs and a lot of distortion and (spacey) sound effects. Stoner songs are longer than usual with repetitive melodic outros (like a sort of Trance Metal).

In the mid-eighties, Stoner blends with more energetic and louder genres, such as Hardcore Punk and Grunge. The result is a very thick and psychedelic but also fast and technical sound: a sludge of heavy guitar music, which kept gaining popularity until this day: Sludge Metal. Both Stoner and Sludge Metal’s characteristics make these genres the most Rock-like types of Metal, which is why they’re also called “Rock” or simply Sludge and Stoner to avoid any conflict. Sludge is the latest development in a separate strain of drug-influenced and psychedelic Heavy Metal: Acid Rock & Classic Metal → Space Rock → Doom Metal → Stoner Metal → Sludge Metal.

Many Stoner or Sludge Metal songs are also recognizable by their slow-motion soundwall of interwoven distorted guitar riffs, sounding as if the apocalyptic revelation of an evil god is near.

### [1990] Gothic Metal & Symphonic Metal
Eventually the melancholic, haunting sounds of **Gothic Rock** found their way to heavy metal (Doom Metal has more in common with Classic Metal than Gothic Rock). The energy and wildness of other Metal was incompatible with Goth, but the much slower, darker Doom / Stoner Metal was almost proto Gothic Metal. True Gothic Metal is only a very small genre though, because the combination of Metal and Gothic is a precariously balanced one, quickly turning into Darkwave or something not Gothic. A more stable and durable genre was achieved by trading the synth sound for classical music (Symphonic Metal) with professional singers (sopranos, tenors…). The outcome is chaotic, romantic and mesmerizing Metal, but with a dark, despairing and brutal undertone (Doom meets Death) which made it appropriate to be also called Gothic Metal. Therefore it is advisable not to separate these genres as they share too much overlapping. Gothic Metal is known for the use of female band leaders/vocalists which makes the genre arguably the least macho of all Metal genres. With melancholic or poetic themes, usually embedded in an extremely escapist fantasy world of angels, elves and crystalline beauty, Gothic Metal could come straight out of The Lord of the Rings or a mythical role playing computer game. Heavy Metal has a number of very popular subgenres related to Gothic Metal, which also dwell on fantasy worlds (but this time of dwarves, druids and Vikings) like Folk Metal and Viking Metal.

### [1991] Black Metal
The genre outlined here is actually the second wave of **Black Metal** (See: **Extreme Metal**). The first wave was very obscure and rapidly vanished. Norway, a country of cold, harsh, and unforgiving landscapes, became the perfect breeding ground for **Black Metal** - arguably the most extreme and least accessible form of metal. Although **Black Metal** is a less percussion and bass oriented than its contemporary counterparts, its chaotic, screaming avalanche of macabre noise sounds like it was made by the Devil himself. Hi-pitched vocals, symphonic/Gothic elements, and shrill, hyperfast guitar riffs make such a statement almost believable. **Black Metal** has always been more about the content than the music itself, trying to be as satanic and anti-Christian as possible (and so are many of its practicers). The exact opposite however, is also true, in the form of Christian Black Metal, indicating that probably any genre imaginable already exists.

**Black Metal** bands are recognizable by their bombastic music, satanic names, elaborate artwork (usually with a chaotic web of sharp forms) and heavy black & white make-up (reminiscent of Glam Metal but much more grim and serious). Themes of torture, pain, blood, and sacrifice occur more than in other Metal genres. Some Black Metal bands became frontpage news by committing acts of murder, violence and desecration, leading to a large amount of indepth Black Metal documentaries about this most evil of music genres.

### [1995] Nu Metal & Rap Metal
The Scandinavian styles of Metal (Black, mainly Norway / Death, mainly Sweden / Gothic, mainly Finland) would change the Metal music industry for years to come, but also pull it more underground. A new mainstream, popular genre was bound to emerge, as the same (dinosaur) Thrash and **Classic Metal** bands kept filling stages over and over again. The heaviest genres of the time (Death, **Industrial Metal** and **Metalcore**) were all thrown into an eclectic mix, but mostly Groove Metal and Rap Rock formed the basis for **Nu Metal**. These genres were only a small step away from fusing Rap or Breakbeat elements into Metal. The outcome was a recipe that could not fail because it was Rap, Rock, and Metal all-in-one. Indeed, “New Metal” had many Rap and few Metal elements: downtuned riffs, breakbeats, scratching, emphasis on kick drums and most noticeably no guitar solos, though the genre lacked no heavy bass or aggressiveness. The difference between **Nu Metal** and **Rap Metal** is rather negligible; the latter is reserved for songs which explicitly feature Rap lyrics, though they are both heavily influenced by **Rap Rock**.

**Nu Metal** is often linked to **Emo(core)**, as piercing lyrics about frustration and depression (self-mutilation, suicide, abuse, etc.) find its way into the heart of adolescents through melancholic choruses; a very distinctive rupture with previous Metal genres. Fashion is another topic where **Nu Metal** breaks the rules, with a bizarre mix of Emo and Metal styles and some marginal extravaganza. All these elements contribute to a living paradigm of disturbance: psychosis in sound and flesh.

### [1999] Metalcore/NWOAHM (New Wave of America Heavy Metal)
In a desperate attempt to prevent **Nu Metal** from remaining the last chapter in the history of **Heavy Metal** and to prove that Metal would survive in the 21st century, the ambiguous term **NWOAHM** (New Wave of American Heavy Metal) was conceived. This was far from necessary, as Metal is perhaps the only super-genre were all different styles are still being practiced and performed intensively. At first, this wave of American bands seemed only unified in their stance against Nu-Metal, but gradually a specific, well-defined genre unfolded, named **Metalcore**. It must be noted that Metalcore already had a long and experimental history before Nu Metal, emerging shortly after Crossover Thrash, but remaining rather obscure before the mid nineties. Instead of mutually aggravating each other towards the extreme like **Grindcore**, Metalcore is a balanced mix of Hardcore and (Death) Metal elements, which undoubtedly has led to longer, more complex songs. The song structure and mentality is still Hardcore, but with a slower drum beat and metallic single note guitars. Metalcore is the least emotional type of Hardcore, which has led to the hyperrational, technical Mathcore or Math Metal and Math Rock. Other, lesser known subgenres include Melodic Metalcore, Noisecore, Deathcore, and Nintendocore. Metalcore is a forced marriage between Hardcore Punk and Metal in order to save both genres their legacies, despite mutual differences. Nevertheless, Metalcore’s numerous offspring subgenres prove the healthiness of this marriage in one way or another.
