## Rap & Hip Hop
- [[1974] Old Skool Rap Pioniers](#1974-Old-Skool-Rap-Pioniers)
- [[1982] Electro](../master/breakbeat.md#1982-Electro)
- [[1984] Golden Age Rap (& Hardcore Rap)](#1984-Golden-Age-Rap--Hardcore-Rap)
- [[1986] Miami Bass & Bounce](#1986-Miami-Bass--Bounce)
- [[1987] (West Coast) Gangsta Rap](#1987-West-Coast-Gangsta-Rap)
- [[1989] Jazz Rap / Native Tongue](#1989-Jazz-Rap--Native-Tongue)
- [[1991] Progressive Rap / Nu Skool Rap](#1991-Progressive-Rap--Nu-Skool-Rap)
- [[1994] Reggaetón & Latin Rap](#1994-Reggaetón--Latin-Rap)
- [[1995] (Dirty) South Rap, Crunk & Snap](#1995-Dirty-South-Rap-Crunk--Snap)
- [[1996] East Coast Gangsta Rap](#1996-East-Coast-Gangsta-Rap)
- [[2003] Trap & Drill](#2003-Trap--Drill)
- [[2004] Urban Breaks (Nu R&B II)](#2004-Urban-Breaks-Nu-RB-II)
- [[2005] Glitchhop & Wonky](../master/breakbeat.md#2005--Glitchhop--Wonky)

**Hip Hop** is not a genre, but a huge subculture encompassing a whole lot more than just music. Hip Hop consists of what is known as “the Four Elements”: breakdancing, graffiti, turntablism (mixing and scratching, the work of the DJ), and rapping (the work of the MC); a harmony of dance, visual art, spoken word, and technology. But **Hip Hop** also has its own customs, an idiosyncratic “code”, enriching and defining the subculture: gang visual language for a start, or an obsession with clean sneakers to show respect for personal property when rappers could barely afford a second pair of shoes. And let’s not forget “Bling Bling”: often misinterpreted for status symbols, these heavy, exuberant golden necklaces and rings represent ancient African warrior tribe symbols. Because **Hip Hop** is first and foremost a powerful stance.

All **Rap** or **Hip Hop** music consists of two equally important parts: the beat and the rhyme. The beat used to be made by certain old **Funk** (or **Disco**) records which featured breakdowns: sections with only the drummer (and bass) playing. These sections were used to create a continuous (looped) breakbeat (see more at **Breakbeat**). Sampling, a technique of cutting and pasting small sounds from existing records, was used to complement the breakbeat with melody, bass and sound effects. Though controversial from a legal point of view, the work some artists devoted to create the perfect beat is extraordinary and most samples were never recognized. Since the late eighties, electronic samplers could store and record a variety of samples, leading to a torrent of **Rap** productions.

The word “rap” is hip hop slang and translates more or less to “flow” (of words). **Rap** is thus music consisting of “raps” or flows (or rhymes). The phrase “hip hop” however has very obscure roots, going a long way back into black culture. Hip simply means hip but was often placed near hop, what more or less refers to dancing or partying. Yet the exact etymology has been lost over the course of time. Afrika Bambataa and the Sugar Hill Gang popularized this phrase already known among blacks to describe a gathering, a movement, or a place of both fun and coolness.

The real power of **Rap** lies in the opportunity to convey elaborate and profound messages, thanks to the continuous use of lyrics throughout the music. With more words per song than any other genre, **Rap** can amuse, protest, or connect in ways other genres cannot. Especially the latter is often forgotten: early **Rap** tried to end ghetto poverty, bigotry and racism by reaching out to white audiences, connecting remote subcultures.

**Rap** did not only inherit the concept of sound systems, DJ’s with turntables, and toasting from Jamaica, but also the love for cannabis. Besides **Jamaican** music, no super-genre is as connected with the drug as **Rap**, though many rappers have expressed strong anti-drug messages. The aural psychedelic effect of marihuana synergizes well with the repetition of a looped breakbeat combined with unexpected and atmospheric samples, while the psychological effect on reasoning, associating, and verbalizing facilitates high-tempo rapping. One must of course also not forget the incredibly abundant vocabulary of Hip Hop slang, partly as a consequence of marihuana use.

**Rap** originates from the ghetto and is strongly regional. Since **Rap** is more language oriented than other genres as well, its various subgenres are therefore geographically demarcated. However, these subgenres are only withheld in musicmap if they have distinctive technical and ideological properties, not only language. This is why e.g. French Rap, Russian Rap, and Nederhop are not separately mentioned as genres, though they are vibrant and interesting realms of **Hip Hop**. Since the nillies, **Rap** has gone through an identity crisis. The once powerful and innovative concept of rhyming over sampled beats has become commonplace and its magnetism has withered. With more eclecticism, Autotune, file sharing, audio streaming and the coming of “Ring Tone Rap” (inexpensive **Rap** made for smartphones), **Rap** has seemed to have traded its warrior mentality for something tangible. Though there are still **Rap/Hip-Hop** artists that stay true to Hip-Hop’s roots and heritage.

### [1974] Old Skool Rap Pioniers
The early stages of **Rap** (or **Hip-hop** culture) were very small and brittle. There were only a select number of revolutionary pioneering artists, originating from South Bronx, N.Y. It was quite an experimental scene, with large influences from both **Funk** and **Disco**: the main genres in the New York club “Disco Fever”, where **Old Skool Rap** made its first clubbing entrance. **Rap** did not originate from nightclubs however, but at spontaneous outdoors neighborhood parties. Jamaican DJ Kool Herc introduced the concept of sound systems which gained huge appeal yet never left the ghetto. Friendly breakdance battles, fought between different dance crews and/or pioneering **Rap** groups, contributed to a vibe of joy and exuberance at these sound system parties – a scene of something grand stirring on the horizon.

**Old Skool Rap** differs from later genres in a modest experimentation with rhymes. Pioneering rappers take existing **Disco** or **Funk** records, use instrumental parts, and nicely rap on top of the beat, without deviating from metre or tempo.

The criticism that **Rap** lacks originality due to its excessive use of sampling can hardly be justified when one looks at the absurd fusion of completely unrelated techniques and genres in **Old Skool Rap**: mixing and scratching (a completely new technique) of the most rare **Funk** records one can find, toasting (a **Jamaican** vocal technique) over it, while eventually (during **Electro Rap**) even being influenced by the most innovative electronic music of all time coming all the way from Germany (**Krautrock**). This could only be invented by people with little education who had nothing to gain or lose but just wanted to have fun: black youngsters from the ghetto.

### [1984] Golden Age Rap (& Hardcore Rap)
It took a decade before **Rap** got out of the ghetto and onto records, conquering the globe. What started in New York, spreaded throughout the whole US East coast, with different **Rap** groups (usually more than one MC) selling gold or platinum albums. This period (mid till late eighties) were the heydays of **Hip-hop**, when there was massive appeal combined with still little negative publicity (**Rap** wasn’t affiliated with either criminality or commercial selling-out yet).

There are several reasons for this large appeal. **Rap** gets more appreciated by middle class and white audiences, because they can relate to the music. Rappers start rapping about responsibility, political messages, anti-drugs, anti-capitalism and **Hip-Hop** is no longer a secluded subculture with “weird’ customs. Especially Run DMC’s implementation of **Rock** elements and the fact that MTV – who finally became a strong supporter of the music with the program “Yo! MTV Raps” – became national and available on cable in 1983, helped spread **East Coast Rap** among less obvious audiences. But perhaps the most important aspect of this genre is a different approach in making the music; MC’s no longer rap over existing records, but the beat and the rhyme become one. The beat gets made from scratch, sometimes specifically for a made rhyme, and MC’s evolve in their rhyming skills, resulting in more professional and eloquent flows than **Old Skool Rap**.

The government didn’t always approve with this new music unfortunately, because a number of **Rap** groups expressed political criticism, tales of ghetto life, explicit language or a favoritism for criminality. These early examples of **Gangsta Rap** (also East Coast based) are known as the subgenre **Hardcore Rap**. The Congressional Hearings of 1985 were an immediate consequence of **Hardcore Rap** and forced all artists with “explicit content” to put a parental advisory label on their albums. But **Rap** became the principal victim while many explicit **Rock** or **Metal** albums were let off the hook, exposing the racist subtext of these labels. However, this “enemy of the state” reputation didn’t stop **Rap** from becoming one of the biggest phenomenons in eighties’s music.

### [1986] Miami Bass & Bounce
Musically speaking, Miami used to be one of the most important cities in the eighties. After the arrival of sequencers and the TR-808 drum machine, local producer Amos Larkins used these tools intensively to create a new type of **Electro Rap**. The bass of **Rap** beats was enhanced as hard as possible, creating a really fat, greasy bass: ideal for shaking big bootys to, loved by all (black) **Miami Bass** artists (or at least making video clips of it). In a very straightforward way **Miami Bass** was redubbed “Booty Bass”. However, the genre probably wouldn’t have grown into a fully mature genre if it wasn’t for Miami’s “stereo wars”, where people showed off and called out each other to see who had the best, most bass-heavy stereo soundsystem. Images of palm trees, eighties stereo cassette boomboxes, and slick pink or leopard-print convertibles immediately spring to mind when listening to this music, which is firmly rooted within that idiosyncratic subcultural context. **Miami Bass** is pure summer music, with lots of fresh **Electro** effects and no political or serious lyrics whatsoever. It only dealt about sex and booming sounds in the most explicit way possible, like an Americanized form of **Ragga**.

A few years later, New Orleans took cues from Miami and developed its own kind of bass, called **Bounce**. As a subgenre with little restraint, **Bounce** is hypersexual music aimed at twerking onto simple **Electro** beats and breaks, often with vocoded vocals. As one can see, pointing out differences between **Bounce** and **Miami Bass** would really be a bridge too far.

### [1987] (West Coast) Gangsta Rap
One side of **Rap’s** bipolar disorder (playful and fun versus reactionary and profane) grew more and more fierce: the latter. The essence of **“Hardcore Rap”** – as it briefly existed – was fueled by the frustrations and anger of everyday ghetto life, where the problems of discrimination and poverty forced many into criminality. Ghetto criminals or “gangstas” used Rap to ventilate about this situation in an explicit and aggressive manner. **Gangsta Rap** evolved at the West Coast of the US, mainly in the (neighbor)hoods of Los Angeles. The situation spiraled out of control, with neverending “turf wars” about which gang was allowed to control which neighbourhood. Not the least of causes for this urban warfare was crack cocaine (smoked crystals), which emerged in the mid eighties and proved to be highly more addictive and destructive than regular cocaine. Eventually the spiral hit rock bottom, culminating in the historical L.A. riots of 1992, not by chance the breakthrough of **Gangsta Rap**.

Although in content it’s a lot more hardcore than other **Rap**, **West Coast Rap’s** sound is light and funky (fitting for the warm climate). The genre is a paradox of menacing or scandalous messages conveyed through lightweight sounds. The music is filled with stereotypical sound effects: chimes or ringing bells, high-pitched nasal synth tunes, and deep, greasy moog basslines. Especially the offshoot subgenre, **G-Funk** (G for gangsta), which sampled only the greasiest and grooviest **Funk**. The focus on royalty-free Rare Groove records and digitally made sounds was an immediate consequence of the ban on sampling after the 1991 Biz Markie court case. Although **West Coast Rap** was already slumbering in the late eighties with pioneers Ice-T and N.W.A., the genre erupted into mainstream in ’91-’92 with the notorious Death Row Records label and debuts of some of **Rap’s** most famous artists.

### [1989] Jazz Rap / Native Tongue
**Jazz Rap** or **Jazz-Hop** (obviously a fusion of **Jazz** and **Rap**) grasped the opportunity of **Rap** as a typical “black thing” to stress racial issues and raise racial awareness, but in a rather subtle way. Implicitly by incorporating elements from (black) **Soul Jazz**, the father of **Funk** and therefore the grandfather of **Rap**. More explicitly by providing counterweight for the negative publicity of **Gangsta Rap**. **Jazz Rap** told sincere, empathic stories of love and everyday life to show that **Rap** can be filled with positive vibes instead of negative. The combination of warm, soft **Jazz** tunes and optimistic funky lyrics was a marriage made in heaven: the perfect summer music. Nevertheless, **Jazz Rap** is not always happy, but can sometimes also be melancholic. **Jazz Rap** usually has a lower average tempo than other **Rap** genres. One of the first **Jazz Rap** posses, strongly stressing the racial issues, was called “Native Tongue”, which eventually became a synonym for racially aware **Jazz Rap**.

### [1991] Progressive Rap / Nu Skool Rap
Out of **Jazz Rap**, a strong and endless **Hip-Hop** movement emerged: the new (or “nu”) school. Next to the aggressiveness of **Gangsta Rap** and vulgarity of **South Rap/Miami Bass**, the **Nu Skool** offered a third alternative for **Rap** fans who wanted more than these transparent provocateurs. As a parallel underground stream, the **Nu Skool** experimented more with techniques and creating own sounds, earning the name **Progressive Rap**. Instead of nicely matching the rhyme to a predetermined pattern, **Nu-Skool** rappers became lyrical swordsmiths, striking their verbal avalanches at any unguarded point of the beat.

**Nu Skool Rap** is sometimes divided into three subgenres, based on their lyrical content: **Conscious Rap**, **Abstract Rap**, and **Political Rap**.
Even more than the **Native Tongues**, **Conscious Rap** stresses the native roots of Africa, often identifying with radical African tribes or militant black Muslims. But – and herein lies the difference – they did so in a revolting manner. No more would the black man rap with a jazzy smile on his face but claim the power back with a fist in the air.
**Abstract** or **Experimental Rap** focuses on special techniques and unexpected rhythms. Content is less important than form (and therefore abstract) and many microgenres emerge such as **eft-Field Hip-Hop**.
**Political Rap** is self-explanatory: with its sharp and relentless critique on government and corporate society – often with anti-capitalist and anti-illuminati messages – it’s no surprise that **Political Rap** is rather unknown due to a partisanship of US media in favor of other Rap.

Ironically, **Nu Skool** becomes a heavily studied **Rap** genre among a number of white researchers, as it is a prime example of just how rich and surprising **Hip-hop** culture can be.

### [1994] Reggaetón & Latin Rap
**Latin Rap**, a mixture of **Gangsta Rap** and Latin music, proved to be a successful cocktail. The mix of exotic breakbeat rhythms (filled with brass, congas or Latin instruments) and Spanish rap lyrics created an almost unrivaled tropical atmosphere and attitude of ‘coolness’. **Latin Rap** was far from slow and laidback but rather spicy and furious, meant to be played at max volume while cruising through the favelas and Hispanic ghettos. Instead of adding Latin elements to **Rap** music (what happened in the US), artists in Puerto Rico added American **Gangsta Rap** to their native music (mainly heavy Bomba and a bit of Plena) creating a whole new genre: **Reggaetón** (which has nothing to do with **Reggae**, but did get influenced by **Dancehall**). The result was similar to **Latin Rap**, but the rhythm was entirely based on Bomba with no **R&B** samples whatsoever, and the lyrics were even more explicit than **Latin Rap**. **Reggaeton** is based on the **Ragga** Dembow riddim, which uses the snare of a drum machine. The genre eventually made a surprising transfer to the world of **Electro House**, leading to **Moombahton**.

### [1995] (Dirty) South Rap, Crunk & Snap
**South Rap** is a contested genre name, as it serves more as an umbrella term than an easily recognizable style. During the mid nineties, many regional **Rap** genres emerged in the southern part of the US: **Atlanta Rap**, **Houston/Memphis Rap**, **New Orleans Rap**, **Miami/Florida Rap**... Typical about these genres is generally a slower tempo than usual, combined with increased emphasis on bass. The music is supposed to feel ‘thick’ and ‘hot’, displaying the same atmosphere as its environment. Catchy choruses and sexual-themed lyrics (hence the name **“Dirty South”**) are a staple among the more happy styles of **South Rap**, in which funny or everyday stories can also appear. On the other hand, raw, gritty rhymes focused on drug trade form the blueprint of other styles (e.g. **Memphis Rap**). What they all have in common however, is a strong tendency towards partying and clubbing, either happy and nonsensical or dark and heavy. Especially during the nillies, when the more uptempo, twerk-friendly, dance-oriented genre Crunk, with its overlapping subgenre **Snap**, arrives. **Crunk** gets its name from shouts to the crowd, known as “crunks”. The combination of synthbass-heavy **Crunk** with slow-motion, criminal **Memphis Rap** is only a small step away from **Trap**. Thanks to a rather eclectic nature and a certain basic shielding from commercial mainstream, **South Rap** has survived as one of the fittest **Rap** genres, leading **Rap** into the new millennium.

### [1996] East Coast Gangsta Rap
**Gangsta Rap** was not only anti-state (which was nothing new) but also anti-rappers. That is to say: other posses or fake rappers. The proudness of succeeding in genuine criminal entrepreneurship (“Original Gangsta”) while dealing with emotional struggle and “dissing” (badmouthing) other rappers, was the stereotypical image of the gangsta rapper. This attitude gained a huge appeal, also across the country. At the East Coast rappers took more samples from **Disco** and **Soul** (piano and strings) rather than **Funk** (bass guitars, synth), but even **Rock** was possible. The east coast sound was also produced in a more polished manner. **East Coast Gangsta** rappers tried to attain less of a ghetto thug image and a lot more of a well-dressed, rich, mobster image. This is where the original meaning of “bling-bling” got lost and caught up in the mix of richness and status symbols such as sport cars, swimming pools and mansions. One must take note that this is actually the second wave of **East Coast Gangsta Rap**. The first one – **Hardcore Rap** – emerged during **Rap’s Golden Age** and never attained the gargantuan record sales the successive wave had. Eventually **East Coast Gangsta Rap** evolves more and more into a mainstream radio format and loses all hardcore edges to the point where separation from **Urban Breaks** becomes impossible.

### [2003] Trap & Drill
Slowly a new style of **Rap** music bubbled up in the shadows of Southern US underground: **Trap**. This particular type of **South Rap** differs from other **Rap** by adding lots of synthesizer and being often completely computer made with lots of hard, digital sounds instead of **R&B** samples. **Trap** also drops the beat on an offbeat, giving a more dramatic, slow-motion build-and-drop feel, reminding of **Dubstep**. Pronounced snares, doubled crisp hi-hats, heavy TR-808 use, and sometimes even brass instruments all add perfectly to **Trap’s** aggressive, bleak lyrical content. It is no coincidence that the word “Trap” is **Hip-Hop** slang for a drug trade location, adding a sense of paranoia to the music.

After 2010, **Ghettotech** influences certain **Trap** producers and the subgenre **Drill** is born: even darker and grittier than **Trap**, but with less pronounced breaks and clearly obsessed with drugs. After all, **Trap** and **Drill’s** sound are heavily influenced by the habit of syrup sipping: a new type of drug behavior where codeine or promethazine cough syrup is mixed with soda or liquor. Combined with the effects of marihuana, a slow motion sound with strong hooks, unexpected interrupts and slurry, intoxicated lyrics is the outcome.

### [2004] Urban Breaks (Nu R&B II)
Where the first wave of Nu (new) or **Urban R&B** was still linked to original forms of **R&B** (especially **Soul**) a second wave broke all that ties and became a monster dance floor phenomenon. Here we have a soft and smooth type of **Rap** music but with big hooks and heavy synth basslines, hence **Urban Breaks** is a more appropriate term. There’s also no more room for sweet ballad singing in **Urban Breaks**, but strong, loud (and heavily autotuned) choruses alternated by (rap) verses, take the lead. Instead of focusing on gigs and albums like its predecessor (in the tradition of eighties **Disco-Pop**), **Urban Breaks** focuses more on singles, remixes and DJ-friendly music. The music genre became immensely popular, but not just for its catchy sound. Major record labels and clever producers marketed **Nu R&B** to the youth like **Bubblegum** and simply labeled it **“R&B”**, leading to a great deal of ignorance about the term till this day. It is often considered the most commercial genre of all time, and therefore also one of the most despised, especially by true **Rap** and **R&B** artists who feel their genres have been violated. But **Nu R&B** is also adored, especially by a young female crowd, to which the slow but hooky breakbeat rhythm is addictive and encourages sexual dancing, which in turn attracts a large male audience.
