## Rhythm'N'Blues (R&B)
- [[1943] (Early) Rhythm'N'Blues](#1943-Early-RhythmNBlues)
- [[1951] Doo Wop](#1951-Doo-Wop)
- [[1959] Memphis Soul / Deep Soul / Southern Soul (STAX)](#1959-Memphis-Soul--Deep Soul--Southern-Soul-STAX)
- [[1962] Chicago Soul & Detroit Soul (Motown)] (#1962-Chicago-Soul--Detroit-Soul-Motown)
- [[1965] Philly Soul (& 60S Girl Groups)](#1965-Philly-Soul--60S-Girl-Groups)
- [[1968] Early Funk & P-Funk](#1968-Early-Funk--P-Funk)
- [[1972] Disco](#1972-Disco)
- [[1973] Soul Blues (Southern Soul II)](#1973-Soul-Blues-Southern-Soul-II)
- [[1976] Go-Go (& Bounce Beat)](#1976-Go-Go-Bounce-Beat)
- [[1980] Deep Funk / Rare Groove & Nu Funk](#1980-Deep-Funk--Rare-Groove--Nu-Funk)
- [[1984] Boogie / Electrofunk](#1984-Boogie--Electrofunk)
- [[1987] New Jack Swing / Swingbeat](#1987-New-Jack-Swing--Swingbeat)
- [[1996] Neo Soul / Nu Soul](#1996-Neo-Soul--Nu-Soul)
- [[1998] Urban Soul / Urban Pop (NU R&B I)](#1998-Urban-Soul--Urban-Pop-NU-RB-I)
- [[2004] Urban Breaks (Nu R&B II)](../master/rap.md#2004-Urban-Breaks-Nu-RB-II)
- [[2007] Nu Disco & Funktronica](#2007-Nu-Disco--Funktronica)

Like the name implies, **Rhythm ‘n’ Blues** (**“R&B”** or **“RnB”**) is the powerful combination of two old music genres. **Gospel** (the Rhythm) on one hand, which provides an infectious groovy tempo that was already noticeable in its early barbershop days with handclapping and rhythmical vibrating voices. Blues on the other hand, which delivers warm chords and rich bass. **“Gospel & Blues”** combines diverse musical elements and is therefore a highly flexible hybrid genre, forming a bridge between many super-genres. R&B can be the middle ground between **Blues** and **Rock**, but also between **Rap** and **Pop** or **Gospel** and **House**, which makes it one of the most accessible music genres.

The cornerstone aspect of all **R&B** is the backbeat: the 2nd and 4th beat of each bar becomes accentuated, creating a strong cadence. Backbeat makes **R&B** highly danceable, eventually leading to **Disco** and the concept of nightlife dance culture and clubbing. **R&B** is also known for more complex rhythms and drums; the introduction of the breakbeat or a high emphasis on percussion. Instrumentation follows out of the basic **Blues** set-up: guitar, bass, and drums. Yet almost always one or more instruments are added, selected by their ability to create a richer sound and radiate a warm, cozy feeling: violins, synth, vibraphone, Hammond organ, or brass horns.

Although **R&B** is rather a diverse collection of genres, the common themes of optimism, love and joy recur in all of them. A positive vibe, amplified by invigorating performances by artists with a charismatic, radiant appearance, makes R&B among the most popular of genres. Such joy is a clear rupture with **R&B’s** predecessor, **Blues**. Some smaller exceptions (**Early R & B**, **Doo Wop**) and one big one (**Disco**) put aside, all **R&B** can be divided into three strong families even more known than **R&B** itself: **Soul**, **Funk** and **Urban**.

**Soul** is a secular and more pop oriented continuation of **Gospel**: gentle and emotional songs (usually about love) with high production values but even more benevolent willpower. **Soul** actually refers to a personal quality of high morality: a **Soul** person is a righteous being. **Soul** was the dominant mainstream music genre in the first half of the sixties and remained popular ever since. With multiple subgenres and three revivals (**Neo-Soul**, **Vintage Soul Revival**, and **Future Soul**), it is clear to see that **Soul’s** strength has barely diminished.

**Funk** evolves out of **Soul** but reaches out to **Jazz** and a bit of **Rock** to create even more rhythmical music, based on a single chord. **Funk** brings a repetitive pulsing groove around which every song is built, making the genre more dance-friendly than **Soul**. **Funk** likes to use electric bass or electro synth distortions to create a “greasy” sound, while the percussion section is hardly distinguishable from the melody or bass section: all the instruments have become one - the **Funk** groove. The word funk is derived from old slang for the smell of sex: enough said. Many **Funk** subgenres have emerged and recent revivals prove an undying popularity, although **Funk** has never been mainstream nor underground: it knows exactly how to stay on the edge of the spotlights. Something that could not be said of **Disco**: a blend of **Funk** and **Soul** that takes over the entire popular music scene in the late seventies.

**Urban** is the latest development of **R&B**, where it blends with **Rap**, **Pop** and a bit of Latin into a fusion that should function equally well for nightclubbing, album sales, live concerts or radio performances. Therefore **Urban** has become a very dominant music genre and often criticized for commercialism and shallowness. The word urban comes from the “Urban Contemporary” radio format, where the latest forms of **R&B** are played that are the most suitable for going-out (in city clubs, hence urban). As a result of Urban’s popularity, the general term **R&B** became synonymous with **Urban** and for many (young) people, these two genres are misinterpreted as one and the same. But real **Rhythm ‘n’ Blues** is an immensely large and diverse music family: a lineage with a tremendous passion and respect for its own productions, and usually with an almost obligatory request to get up and move.

### [1943] (Early) Rhythm'N'Blues
**(Jump) Blues** dramatically changed when the band stopped being an anonymous whole but received a face: the frontman, the singer/songwriter. The moment black musicians stepped forward with their own music, driven by a powerful and driven backbeat, it quickly was discarded as something vile, not meant for “decent, white people”. The previous term for **R&B**, “Race Music”, already made that very clear. Race Music was a Billboard category reserved for **Blues** music, as **Jazz** and **Gospel** also featured white musicians. Such outspoken racism was put to a halt in 1948, with the replacement of the term by **“Rhythm and Blues”**, abbreviated as **R&B**. Thus at first **R&B** was seen as synonymous with **Blues**, but it quickly developed into a separate style.

True **R&B** (from the forties, as the term received a new meaning at the end of the century) had very few instruments, similar to **Gospel**. Melodies became shorter and more repetitive like riffs, and a steady backbeat is omnipresent. Despite sparse instrumentation, **R&B** focused on an infectious rhythm, like a proto-groove. With more emphasis on albums, performance and singer personality than ever before, the birth of **Rhythm ‘n’ Blues** must be acknowledged as a milestone in the evolution of popular music. It creates the concept of high-profile singers with personal music, who combine their songs on albums in order to reach large audiences. And when finally white singers start reshaping **R&B** in the form of **Rock ‘n’ Roll**, few realized that they witnessed the shape of grand things to come.

### [1951] Doo Wop
**Doo Wop** is an often neglected, but familiar and characteristic genre. It’s being performed by girl or boy groups that sing in vocal harmony: one person sings lyrics while the others perform backing vocals in a polyphonic symphony of gibberish and mumbling, humming sounds or onomatopoeias (like **“Doo Wop”**, hence the name). Sometimes **Doo Wop** features no instruments at all, it can be purely a cappella; a step further in the already modest instrumentation of **Rhythm ‘n’ Blues**. But **Doo Wop** can just as easily feature a supporting band or accompanying instrument on top of its barbershop group. However, this minimal set-up was for most **Doo Wop** artists not a choice: they were so poor that they couldn’t afford any instruments. And while many of them wandered around in New York city, hoping for a glimpse of fortune and fame, only very few succeeded. The ones that did, had the joy of their success resonating in their music. In its smooth, warm, cheerful sound (a sort of peaceful post-war happiness), one can already distinguish the yet-to-come embrace of **Soul**. **Doo Wop** has experienced revivals in subsequent decades and influenced in subtle ways a number of cross-genre songs.

### [1959] Memphis Soul / Deep Soul / Southern Soul (STAX)
A lot of things had changed in 1959 since the ascent of **R&B** around 1943. It was a year of great opportunities and hope. In the southern and middle states of USA, black **R&B** musicians threw **R&B**, **Gospel**, **Blues**, and a bit of **Country** into a big melting pot. They were cooking something that was quite slow but also raw and emotional at the same time. This **Rural** aka **Deep** aka **Memphis Soul** became well known under the leading record company’s name: Stax, granting the name **Stax Soul**. **Memphis Soul** was not only the first kind of **Soul**, but also the most independent one. Musicians wrote their own music - straight from the heart - instead of producers or songwriters. The lyrics were often based on their experiences during the so called “Soul Circuit”: a trail in southern USA almost all **Soul** artists followed, with a high degree of love, sex and liquor along the way.

**Deep Soul** tracks are recognizable by their low tempo, the use of clipped guitar, and a lo-fi production compared to other **Soul**. The latter two characteristics also show a gradual evolution towards **Funk**, the immediate successor of **Deep Soul**. When the music caught on in the UK, it was renamed as **Southern Soul**.

The genre rose greatly alongside national black awareness in the sixties, thanks to the civil rights movement and Martin Luther King. **Southern Soul** was the voice of black pride, but it wasn’t reactionary nor intimidating. **Soul** does not try to combat it opposes, instead it tries to disarm. **Soul** vocalists honor the **Gospel** tradition of forgiveness and harmony. The music is hopeful, warm and portrays intense stories about love and heartbreak that still sound sincere after all these decades.

### [1962] Chicago Soul & Detroit Soul (Motown)
After the rural areas, **Soul** quickly caught on in the urban areas, where it lost a bit of that rural roughness (just as happened with **Country**). First almost immediately in Chicago (**Chicago Soul**) and a bit later in the motor city: Detroit. These urban types of **Soul** were more uptempo and happy than usual (i.e. **Southern Soul** could sometimes be tragic). The experimental melting pot was turned into a factory-produced popular recipe: a strong backbeat, a bouncy, melodic bassline, four part harmony vocals (often female), a tight snare drum, and usually tambourines. It was heavily produced, polished music, especially by that record company that became so well known that its name is a synonym for the genre: **Motown**. Compared to **Chicago Soul**, **Detroit Soul** has more an “industrial” sound and production, and is a lot more danceable. **Motown’s** rhythm sections (drum + bass or tambourine) were all very uniform but thoroughly contemplated. **Chicago** and **Detroit Soul** became exceptionally popular with both black and white audiences (hereby connecting the two cultures), whereas **Memphis Soul** was purely black oriented.

In the UK, the B-sides of **Motown** records became popular as **Northern Soul**. **Northern Soul** is not really a separate genre. It started as a sales pitch to sell **Motown** to North-British youth, but soon exploded into a Rave-like subculture of wild parties, where the most dance-friendly, lesser-known **Detroit Soul** tracks were hunted and played from dusk till dawn.

### [1965] Philly Soul (& 60S Girl Groups)
After **Chicago** and **Detroit**, a third type of “city Soul” emerged (the term urban **Soul** applies to something else). This time it happened in Philadelphia, where **Soul** would have a huge influence on a lot of music to come. **Philly Soul** partly grew out of the early sixties Girl Groups (the Shirelles, the Crystals, the Ronettes), forming the bridge between **Doo Wop** and **Philly Soul**. These Girl Groups were strongly related to Brill Building Pop: heavily produced (e.g. by Phil Spector), premanufactered **Pop** songs with enormous success.

**Philly Soul** shares many characteristics with **Chicago** and **Detroit Soul**, but it is even slicker and more commercial. Tragic and contemplative lyrics became replaced by playfulness. **Philly Soul** is not meant to listen to but to have fun with. The vocal interplay and horns are still present, but now they are accompanied by stimulating or sedative strings. **Philly Soul** is Proto-Disco: the seed that would grow the universal modern nightlife dance culture.

**Philly Soul** launched a significant rise of white artists who also started to make **Soul**, dubbed “Blue Eyed Soul”. Especially after the success of **Disco**, Blue Eyed Soul flourished and continues to do so, though the technical definition of the genre is vague if any.

### [1968] Early Funk & P-Funk
**Soul** was very popular and melodic, but it wasn't really daring or danceable. After a while, artists started looking at **Rock** and **Jazz** for new elements. They preferred the psychedelic, rebellious nature of **Acid Rock** alongside the deep, dynamic part of **Soul Jazz** as flavours of choice for the revolutionary fusion that was **Funk**. James Brown, nicknamed “the hardest working man in show business”, spearheaded the evolution from **Soul** to what became known as **Funk Soul** and eventually **Funk**. But **Funk's** development was already tangible in the Swamp Funk of New Orleans from the forties, influenced by Louisiana creole.

**Funk** places strong emphasis on the first beat of each bar while the rest of the rhythm constantly changes, like an early form of breakbeat. This is known as “The Rhythm of the One” (the one beat, instead of four or two). All instruments work together to enhance this feeling. Percussion becomes accentuated by short, monotone riffs, slapping bass, brass instruments, and accents on synth/piano to create what is known as “the groove”: the pulsing force behind each **Funk** song. Some bands, starting with Parliament and Funkadelic, introduced a more spacey and less syncopated sound, known as **P-Funk**.

Yet **Funk** does not try to blend all instruments into a carefully assembled and produced whole (like **Soul**) but it maintains their individuality to create a more organic sound. **Funk** tries to sound like primal energy or biological essence. Another difference with **Soul** is that **Funk** revolves less around songs and albums: the music is one continuous melting pot, where live performance and technical expertise are valued over touching lyrics and record production. The Apollo Theatre, New York, was such a place where many **Funk** artists blew the audience away with their virtuoso and vigorous performances.

### [1972] Disco
Some **Philly Soul** songs were accompanied by a pulsing, repetitive drum rhythm, which made them the best dance floor fillers in the exclusive gay clubs of New York (and elsewhere in lesser extent). With a dominant, accelerated 4/4 beat, sing-a-long diva choruses, catchy melodies (often intensified by sweeping strings), and much more superficial lyrics than **Soul**, producers had found such a perfect commercial combination of popular **R&B **elements that **Disco** broke out of its isolated environment and conquered the world in an unimaginable way. As pure ecstasy music, with no worries, **Disco** was all about having fun, sex, and dancing in the disc-o-theques: a new type of nightlife place, such as the infamous club Studio 54 in New York. What made these places and **Disco** groundbreaking, was the arrival of the very first continuous dance music: the genesis of the mix.

Like many revolutionary genres, **Disco** was the outcome of a synergetic concurrence of events. On one hand, the use of 12” records for singles allowed deeper grooves, and therefore better sound quality and harder beats; a must for later **House** records. On the other hand, the end of the Vietnam War in 1975, marked a moment of joy despite the actual loss of the war by the US. Yet the people had every reason to celebrate. Their protest had won, not the whims of a war-mongering government they did not support. **Disco** celebration - the pressure release after a decade of counterculture and protest - was without limits. Colorful dresses, afro-wig haircuts, disco balls, glitter, glamour, loose-fitting legs: all typical Disco elements that became popular, especially during the more commercial period of Disco in the late seventies. Before this, **Disco** was a careful evolution of **Funk** (“Disco Roots”) in exclusive parties by professional producers/DJ’s such as Francis Grasso and David Mancuso, starting in 1972. A pivotal moment between these two types of Disco was the film release of “Saturday Night Fever” in 1977, after which not a living soul on earth did not know what **Disco** was.

As one of the biggest mainstream hypes in the history of music, it is no surprise that **Disco** declined almost as fast as it peaked and that it sparked a wave of revulsion (symbolized by the infamous “Disco Sucks” tag). Although not without leaving a legacy of various Post-Disco genres and eventually what became known as “Disco’s Revenge”: **House** music.

### [1973] Soul Blues (Southern Soul II)
The decline of **Soul** (due to the rising popularity of other genres) was mourned by many. Especially the earliest type, **Stax Soul**, became the subject of grief, which golden days were already long gone by the late seventies. Poor black communities of the Southern states felt nostalgic about this rough, emotional and sometimes tragic music, to which they could relate more than than contemporary genres. As a part of the regional culture, **Stax Soul** got reinstituted but in the form of a crossover with **Blues** (making it even more emotional, and often melancholically sounding). It is nevertheless not incorrect to speak about a Southern Soul revival or a second wave, and perhaps even advisable to differentiate the genre from another type of **Soul Blues**. This other style already existed in the fifties and is known as **New Orleans Soul** or **New Orleans Blues**, which was a strong influence on both **Soul** and **Funk**. **New Orleans Blues** – a first wave of **Soul Blues** – is a very emotional, melismatic type of **Blues**, often featuring falsetto vocals. Unsurprisingly this type of **Soul Blues** was quite similar to early **Rhythm ‘n’ Blues**.

### [1976] Go-Go (& Bounce Beat)
**Go-Go** is one of the smallest genres listed on the map. It can be seen as a subgenre of **Funk**, but a very distinctive one. By borrowing conga rhythms from Latin genres and putting more focus on percussion in general, **Funk** received a thriving tempo that seemed to never stop being on the move: it made the **Funk** go. This beating pulse could also be heard in **Go-Go’s** vocals. **Go-Go** is pretty straightforward **Funk** with little experimentation or technology. It stirred up as a popular bouncing fusion genre in Washington’s nightlife, where it remained a geographically isolated phenomenon. During the development of **Old Skool Rap**, **Go-Go** became more and more influenced by **Hip-Hop**, which is clearly audible in its funky breakbeats and uptempo lyrics.

In the 21st century, a subgenre or successor of **Go-Go**, **Bounce Beat,** reinvigorates Washington’s nightlife. **Bounce Beat** is a harder, harsher, more modern version of **Go-Go** with influences from EDM and less emphasis on melody. **Bounce Beat** groups are numerous party crowds, creating a distinctive rhythm: a ceaseless pounding but in a restless manner.

### [1980] Deep Funk / Rare Groove & Nu Funk
Some may say that **Funk** is just **Funk** (which is hard to counter for fusion genres), but there is a difference between well known vocal **(Early)** Funk aimed at performing and the heavier, instrumental **Funk** focused on recording, known as **Deep Funk**. Although this genre already existed in the early seventies, the popularity of **Disco** pushed a number of artists underground during the eighties. Bass got stronger and breaks became more pronounced. The focus laid slightly less on fast drums and rolls but more on a slower tempo groove, pushing the music forward. Production was very raw and gritty like **Southern Soul**. Lots and lots of barely known artists brought out their own, more modern approach of their favorite genre, almost always on vinyl (particularly 45rpm singles). Although these records did get pressed, the number of editions was usually meager. These hard-to-find records (hence **Rare Groove**) were being hunted by **Hip-hop**, **Acid Jazz**, and Breakdance DJ’s everywhere (and still are). Rare Groove’s characteristics (heavy beats, instrumental, recording-focused, relatively unknown) make the genre ideal for sampling and extremely popular with **Rap** and **Breakbeats** artists.

Starting in the nineties, a new wave of international artists created their own version of **Deep Funk**, dubbed **“Nu-Funk”**. **Nu Funk** uses often Latin or exotic influences and more electronic means to create the music, but otherwise it is very similar to classic **Deep Funk**.

### [1984] Boogie / Electrofunk
The Influence from **Funk** on **Electro** bounced back to **Funk**, forging electronic **Funk** and keeping da **Funk** in the eighties alive. This genre has many different subforms but to prevent further pigeonholing, it is advisable to regard all these names as one and the same: **Synth Funk**, **Dance-Funk**, **United Funk**, **Naked Funk**, **Electrofunk** and **(Electro) Boogie**. Sometimes **Funktronica** is used as an alias of **Boogie** as well, but this is actually a different genre. It must be noted however, that **Boogie** already existed before **Disco**, but was still in its very infancy then and not regarded as a separate genre. **(Electro) Boogie** is quite the opposite of **Rare Groove**: digital, polished, and rarely instrumental. Instead of faceless DJ’s hammering on the perfect deep groove, colorful bands in glittering costumes gave it all they got to keep the crowd boogie all night long. In **Electrofunk**, all brass and Jazzy instruments are replaced by synthesizer (and electric guitar), and intensified by heavy use of vocoder vocals, which give the music a robotic sound, without losing the swinging groove; tha boogie. **Boogie** is the performance of **Glam Rock**, the ecstasy of **Disco**, and the sexiness of **Funk** all-in-one. Something that only the eighties would regard as not over-the-top.

### [1987] New Jack Swing / Swingbeat
Make no mistake, this genre has nothing to do with Swing. On the contrary, **New Jack Swing** (NJS) is the updated continuation of the Philadelphia Sound: the body of **Philly Soul** in a brand new jacket of **Rap**. Strong, funky breakbeats no longer form the rhythm for messages of protest or gangster lyrics, but for smooth, harmonic vocals talking about love and romance. Although many (male) **New Jack Swing** artists seemed like young, innocent casanovas, they often had hidden gangster habits, preluding an era of **East Coast Gangsta Rap**. **Swingbeat** (a synonym for NJS) is exactly the way it sounds: extremely catchy and funky with strong emphasis on beat.

The TV-series “The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air” starring Will Smith knew how to bring **New Jack Swing** to a larger audience, featuring some of its songs alongside that particular late eighties **New Jack Swing** fashion: loose **Hip-Hop** wear with flashy colors, round sunglasses, female dreads or male hightop haircuts. But what makes this genre of particular gravity is the marriage of **Rhythm ‘n Blues** and **Rap** into **Urban**, a strong bond that has never fallen apart since.

**New Jack Swing** evolves into **Urban Soul**, but sometimes overlaps with it as well. **New Jack Swing** was already known as **Contemporary Soul** or **Urban Soul** before the rise of the latter, after all.

### [1996] Neo Soul / Nu Soul
During the nineties, **Rhythm ‘n’ Blues** started to cross over to many other popular genres, combined with a lyrical tendency towards shallow and popular content. Slowly the term **R&B** becomes a vassal for major record labels to ensure their profits, with **Swingbeat** as the first, careful step. Independent artists responded with a return to pure, untainted **Soul**. Especially female ones joined the cause, as a reaction to new **R&B’s **sexist or superficial approach. Compared to older styles of **Soul**, this **“Nu Soul”** was stripped down and simple: only one singer instead of vocal harmonies, and not too many instruments. Often there are influences from **Jazz Rap** or **Progressive Rap**, with whom it shares the desire to express proud and honorable black awareness. Although **Neo-Soul** is inclined to a non-commercial stand, production is highly polished and its diva stars surely had little financial worries during the heydays.

While **Neo Soul** has faded nowadays, a return to **Soul** of the sixties conquers more and more radio airspace in the nillies. This so called “Vintage Soul Revival” is barely a new genre, but it illustrates well how **Soul** has timeless and universal qualities. Very recently, new artists have blended **Soul** with **Reggae**, **Rap**, or **Electro(-House)** music into the catch-all genre **“Future Soul”**. It is still too early to define this genre, let alone assess its role in music history.

### [1998] Urban Soul / Urban Pop (NU R&B I)
**Urban Soul**/**R&B** or the “new” **R&B** is so omnipresent that it’s often identified with the general term **R&B**, ignoring five decades of musical evolution. Out of the popular **Rap**/**R&B** hybrid of **New Jack Swing**, a new hybrid gradually unfolds, bursting to life in 1998: real **Urban Soul** or the first wave of **Nu R&B**. Female, predominantly black artists changed **New Jack Swing’s** uptempo **Hip-Hop** sound to a slower, **Soul** infused ballad (but still much faster than regular **Soul**). With their sugar-coated voices – often in harmony or slightly autotuned – they swooped a sense of sentimentality over their songs. A sense discredited with shallowness and capitalism: pure **Pop** music and little **R&B**. The lyrical content could hardly dismantle this prejudice. Corny, timeless love themes seem to be the basic premise. But **Urban Soul** is still a lot more R&B than its successor, **Urban Breaks**. String arrangements, soulful vocals, an absence of sexual promiscuity, and a connection with earlier **Disco**-/Dance-**Pop** are all real **R&B**/**Soul** elements of **Nu R&B’s** first wave that would eventually get discarded.

Although the genre might be considered formulaic **Pop** music and be partly despised for it, this simply proves that it succeeds in finding that perfect formula with **Rap**, **Pop**, and **R&B** ingredients which gets savored by the most.

### [2007] Nu Disco & Funktronica
**Nu-Disco** focuses specifically on **(Post-)Disco** of the late seventies and Eurodisco of the early eighties. This is **Disco** semi-detached from **Soul**, while harboring a stronger beat, which makes it more accessible for the modern public. Just like **Electroclash** brought back **Synthpop** to an EDM-fatigued audience, so reinstalls **Nu-Disco** **(Euro-)Disco** with similar success. **Nu-Disco** recreates these “old” genres by using the latest equipment and technologies. This allows razor-sharp productions and crystal clear sounds (especially **Electro** and **Boogi**e sounds). Apart from this updated sound though, the difference with the original era is minimal. A point that is further being stressed by the use of “edits”: rereleases of old songs without any alterations.

**Funktronica** emerges around the same time, and might be more or less interpreted as a **Boogie Revival**; a return of **Synth Funk** in the 21st century. Because **Funktronica** is influenced by **Italo-Disco** too, it shares much resemblance with **Nu-Disco**. Both genres signify a magical junction right in the center between **Eurodisco**, **Chicago House** and **Electro Funk**. After a long era of “cold” and “heartless” **Electro-House**, **Nu-Disco** and **Funktronica** become welcomed with open hands. From the moment the genre appeared on the website Beatport, along with its unknown DJ exponents, popularity kept increasing drastically: a possible omen that **R&B’s** Golden Age could return with a vengeance.
