## Rock: Rock'n'Roll
- [[1949] Skiffle Revival](#1949-Skiffle-Revival)
- [[1953] Rockabilly & Rock'n'Roll](#1953-Rockabilly--RocknRoll)
- [[1957] American & British Folk Revival](#1957-American--British-Folk-Revival)
- [[1958] Surf Rock/Instrumental](#1958-Surf-RockInstrumental)
- [[1960] Garage Rock](#1960-Garage-Rock)

**Rock** in the fifties was still in the early stages of its infancy. The first **Rock** genres were rather unaffiliated and came from many different origins. The precise origin of **Rock ‘n’ Roll** is very complex and often part of a deeper debate. **Skiffle**, **Rockabilly** and **Folk Revivals** are all primitive forms of **Rock**, showing a slow development from different paths towards a more unified sound during **Rock’s** Golden Age. Be that as it may, **Rock ‘n’ Roll** itself – the main genre – was a groundbreaking milestone. The music broke great social barriers for the first time in history. **Rock ‘n’ Roll** connected white cultures (especially the average middle class white American young family) with black cultures (particularly exciting black **R&B** musicians). But Rock also connected the United Kingdom with the United States. British Skiffle was a reaction on the popularity of American **Rock ‘n’ Roll**. Alas, as **Skiffle** never broke through, **Rock ‘n’ Roll** became welcomed by the British, leading to **British Blues Rock** and the British Invasion. Last but not least, **R‘n’R** dissolves the musical barrier between young and old. That is to say: music expands from an adult-only form of entertainment to a vital part of any adolescent or teen life. **Rock ‘n’ Roll** gives the youth their own sound, their genre, their personal revolution against whatever their parents liked to listen.

**Rock ‘n’ Roll** introduces the typical **Rock** instrument set-up, consisting of four to five musicians (though three is possible as well): lead singer, lead guitar, rhythm guitar, drums, and bass (though the singer could also play an instrument). **Rock ‘n’ Roll** is based on the **Jump Blues** rhythm, with a heavily accentuated backbeat. **Rock ‘n’ Roll** is even faster than its direct predecessors **Early Rhythm ‘n’ Blues** and **Jump Blues**, with less emphasis on bass and a replacement of the double bass by the electric bass.

The etymology of “Rock ‘n’ Roll” reveals its subtext: the phrase is old African-American slang for sex. Of course not all **Rock ‘n’ Roll** songs deal about sex, but many were utterly shocking and hedonist for the conservative fifties and some artists put little effort in concealing their dirty mind. Take Jimmy Lloyd’s “Rocket in my Pocket” for example. Many parents expressed grave concerns and religious figures picked up the chant: **Rock ‘n’ Roll** was the music of the Devil. But forbidden fruit tastes the sweetest and **Rock** indulged in its own delicious aura of danger and excitement; an aura that kept lingering long after the era of **Rock ‘n’ Roll**. Interestingly, the term also refers to the type of dancing couples usually do on **R’n’R**, for example with the twist: “rocking” (dancing towards each other) and “rolling” (taking distance).

**Rock ‘n’ Roll** greatly loses its bold spirit in 1960 and the **Rock** craze starts to lie down. The music becomes well-behaved / politically correct and **Soul** takes over as the dominant music force (especially on radio and television), yet obviously lacks the characteristics of **Rock ‘n’ Roll**. The popularity of the “Twist”, a swinging and shaking type of dance, revives **Rock** in the early sixties and prevents the genre from becoming extinct before the British shape it into the rock solid foundation of popular music it has become.

**Rock ‘n’ Roll** itself has largely evaporated during consecutive decades. Apart from revivals of **Rockabilly** and **Surf Rock** in Japan, the music is mostly considered a thing of the past. However, retro interest in earlier subcultures (fashion, design, and music) of the thirties (**Swing**) and the fifties (**Rock ‘n’ Roll**) prove that **Rock ‘n’ Roll** can excite contemporary youth as much as it could in the fifties. **Rock ‘n’ Roll** after all equals tempo and energy; it compels people to lose themselves and become wild, lawless, hedonist – to become **Rock and Roll**.

### [1949] Skiffle Revival
**Skiffle** is one of the oldest popular music genres. Emerging in the twenties in the United States, early **Skiffle** can be seen as a Folk influenced form of Proto-Country; just like Ragtime can be seen as Proto-Jazz and Gospel as Proto R&B. **Skiffle** was music for the poorest of people, who created a true jack-of-all-trades musical melting pot with whatever instrument they could lay their hands on, as long as it was cheap: fiddle, banjo, kanzoo, and household items such as washboards. The biggest challenge was an inexpensive alternative for bass, which they found in large jugs. Jug Bands (actually a synonym for early **Skiffle**) even had to throw pop-up homeparties to pay the rent and their instruments, which were called “Skiffles”.

From 1949 until 1958 a **Skiffle Revival** takes place in the United Kingdom, parallel to the rise of early **Rhythm ‘n’ Blues** and **Rock ‘n’ Roll**. Because Britain lacked the history of Country music, almost all musicians struggled with creating **Rock ‘n’ Roll** music, as they had no access to a quintessential ingredient. In response to American R’n’R, poor British students responded with a type of Folk-Blues-Rock, that was very loud, fast and noisy. They used the same instruments as older American Jug Bands alongside cheap acoustic guitars. But by 1958, **Rock ‘n’ Roll** became so big, that **Skiffle** quickly decayed.

### [1953] Rockabilly & Rock'n'Roll
**Rock ‘n’ Roll** was musically speaking not a great step forward; its origins in **Boogie Woogie** and **R&B** were obvious. It was mainly a racial thing: young, attractive, white singers bringing black music into the living rooms of white people (especially girls), and turning heads by shaking their pelvis and/or standing on pianos. At the same time, **Hillbilly Country** musicians became influenced by early **Country Blues** and created uptempo **Country** with a strong beat, slapped upright bass, and stuttering vocals: **Rockabilly**. Both genres, as well as some **Country** music, originated on the famous Sun Records label in Memphis. **Rock ‘n’ Roll** often overlaps with **Rockabilly’s** simple, uptempo blues with three chords, a boogie back beat, and the holy instrument trinity of rock: drums, guitar and bass. As one can see, early **Rock ‘n’ Roll** was difficult to separate from early **Rhythm ‘n’ Blues**. However, the often overlooked effect of amphetamine (used heavily by many **Rock ‘n’ Roll** stars) changed the sound into the sociocultural revolution that it was: with their trembling voices, exuberant behavior, unbridled energy, and sexual innuendo, they introduced something new, something unheard of and “bad to the bone”. The later “mod” subculture of the fifties (sometimes mistaken for a music genre), were also very drawn into a similar world of bikes, speed, and rock ‘n’ roll. White teens went crazy around the world and soon **Rock ‘n’ Roll** became so popular that the term was used for anything rebellious, and often Rock music in general.

### [1957] American & British Folk Revival
**Folk** music is as old as the people (= the folk) themselves, but got suppressed by the popularity of **Blues**, **Jazz**, and **R&B**. A first revival during the thirties as the voice of protest for lower class folk remained too small to have any impact, yet led to the Archive of American Folk Song in 1928.

The second, post-war revival was much larger and happened both in the UK and US. The arrival of Rock opened the door for college students and bohemians to pick up a guitar and start writing folk-like protest songs (often individually, making them the first singer-songwriters). **Folk Revival** songs are long and stretched with a distinctive chorus. They have a classic song structure, without much experimentation or noticeable elements (such as solos). Most **Folk Revival** artists cared little about whether or not they had any musical talent: many of them could barely sing or play harmonica. It was simple, soft, acoustic rock that obviously was more about the message than the music: anti-war, civil rights, class differences, racism and the capitalism of freshly invented **Pop Music**.

New York especially became the central hub for **Folk Revival**, with an extensive coffee bar culture. Folk revivalists were known for their leftwing ideals and multicultural stance and thereby integrated American black rhythms (**Soul**, **Blues**, **R&B**) with **European Folk**.

### [1958] Surf Rock/Instrumental
The sun, the beach, palm trees, and a carefree (“mellow”) life style were the perfect atmosphere for surf boys to retreat in the shack to work on their guitar technique. With incredibly fast, rolling guitar riffs put in reverb, they created a washing sound that could easily imitate ocean waves and impress girls in that true **Rock ‘n’ Roll** heritage. Almost all **Surf Rock** is purely instrumental (hence the synonym **Instrumental**) and this draws even more attention towards the proficiency of its guitarists. Non-instrumental genres were often much slower and less technical, but also very popular, such as **Sunshine Pop** and **California Sound**. Pure **Surf Rock** with lyrics is called **Surf Pop**, of which the *Beach Boys* are by far the most well-known exponent.

**Surf Rock** features standard 4/4 **Rock ‘n’ Rol**l riffs, yet spiced up by influences from Cuban malagueña songs (a type of Salsa). This made them so fast, catchy and addictive that everyone wanted to play them. Covering **Surf Rock** tunes from other bands was so common and tolerated, that eventually nobody knew anymore who actually made the original. This was non-commercial, DIY, fun music in its purest form, which sadly became almost completely extinct, because almost all bands cared too little for professional distribution or promotion of their music.

### [1960] Garage Rock
**Rockabilly** died almost as abruptly as it emerged when its main icons were either dead, in jail or in the army. **Rock** was not dead however; countless ambitious teens (mostly in the UK) got hooked on the sound and started forming their own **Rock** bands. More often than not, they rehearsed in the garages of their parents. The result was a very raw, amateur, lo-fi sound of **Rock ‘n’ Roll** and the first experiments with distorted guitars. **Garage Rock** is a genre where the “fuzz” distortion effect is used intensively (which makes the guitars sound fuzzy) and it helped spread “the Fuzz sound” across other genres. Such dirty distortion fits nicely with **Garage Rock’s** recurring content of anger and frustration about dealing with heartbreak, cheating and other negative love experiences. Although positive love madness could just as well be an inspiration. Because most **Garage Rock** musicians couldn’t afford decent audio equipment, there was often no budget for voice amplification, resulting in wailing, screaming singers. It wasn’t until the great British Invasion of the mid sixties that **Garage Rock** truly broke loose, with even more bands and crossovers to **Psychedelic Rock** as a result. As **Garage Rock** shares lots of overlapping with **Psy Rock**, the conjoining term **Garage-Psych** was conceived and later also included **Shoegaze**.

**Garage Rock’s** big teenage “fuck-you-we-do-what-we-want” attitude and sound inspired **Punk Rock** itself, as well as contemporary artists who felt a revival was well deserved. After all,**Garage Rock** is the embodiment of sleaziness, roughness, and **Rock’s** nonchalance in all its galore.
