## Techno
- [[1985] Detroit Techno](#1985-Detroit-Techno)
- [[1987] New Beat](#1987-New-Beat)
- [[1990] Hardcore Techno / Rave](#1990-Hardcore-Techno--Rave)
- [[1991] (Free)Tek(k)no / Hardtek](#1991-FreeTekkno--Hardtek)
- [[1992] Ambient Techno & IDM (Intelligent Dance Music)](#1992-Ambient-Techno--IDM-Intelligent-Dance-Music)
- [[1994] Industrial Techno & Schranz I](#1994-Industrial-Techno--Schranz-I)
- [[1994] Minimal Techno](#1994-Minimal-Techno)
- [[1996] Tech House](../master/house.md##1996-Tech-House)
- [[1998] Tech Trance](#1998-Tech-Trance)
- [[2000] Hardtechno (Schranz II)](#2000-Hardtechno-Schranz-II)
- [[2005] Ghetto House, Ghettotech & Juke](../master/house.md#2005-Ghetto-House-Ghettotech--Juke)

**Techno** is a bit like an abstract painting: it is an impressionistic interpretation of the **Funk** groove inspired by futuristic visions, nihilistic views, electronic circuits, or the networks of the inner mind. It is the most introverted of all super-genres - the quiet thinker – who likes to fiddle with technology until the wee hours of the morning. More than anything else, **Techno** is the father of all electronic Dance. Together with **House**, it gave offspring to countless genres. Originally, **Techno** was more sociologically constrained than nowadays. Within Detroit, **Techno** was meant for the lower class citizens where **Garage House** was rather meant for upper class. **House** was fashion/design/hipster, whereas **Techno** was industrial/sweaty/funky. Although this chasm quickly faded when EDM landed in Europe, the spirit of the hardworking blue collar man still resonates deep within **Techno’s** soul.

If **House** is “**Disco’s** Revenge”, then **Techno** is without a doubt “**Funk’s** Revenge”. **Techno** bass lines are based on **Funk** grooves, but completely electronically made. **Techno** uses sounds that hover in between the natural and the artificial, between analogue and digital; sounds that may be real or may not. **Techno’s** funky groove becomes dance by introducing repetition and more pronunciation on each 4/4 beat. Bassline and beat work strongly together and are often deeper and harder than **House**. Each and every **Techno** track ever created has been a quest for finding the perfect rhythm through a careful combination of basslines and drum kicks. **Techno** is usually also a tiny bit faster than **House**, with average BPM ranging between 130 and 140. Strong influences from **Electro**, **Techno’s** direct forefather, surface through technological blips and sounds, which accompany the rhythm without becoming melody (like **Trance**) or ambience (like **House**). A very important aspect of **Techno** is that it’s the only Dance super-genre that is (almost) always instrumental. **House**, **Trance**, **Hardcore** and others often feature vocal samples. **Techno** almost never; it symbolizes the emancipation of electronic rhythm. The rhythm is the star, the front member; there is no need for voice.

The original “Belleville Three” **Techno** creators were strongly fascinated by science fiction and technology. Dreams of futuristic cities as in Ridley Scott’s “Blade Runner” formed a harsh contrast with the current state of their derelict home town; the city that had lost its motor: Detroit. In one sci-fi novel, “Techno City” by Alvin Snurr, they found a trademark name to distinguish their **Funk**-based music from the brand new **Disco**-based **Chicago House**. **Techno House** was the name of the new genre. The seamlessly futile yet critical decision at the time to release one of the first full records as simply **“Techno”** would righteously divide early EDM into two separate schools instead of one, with gargantuan consequences.

In the nineties, the word **Techno** becomes often used as an umbrella term for all Dance music. It is of course advisable to refrain from such confusing and incorrect terminology, but it does illustrate the exponentially rising popularity of the genre at the time. Real **Techno** is rather limited in its amount of subgenres; its purist and minimalist approach allow little room for a large variety of styles. **Techno** hasn’t produced new styles in quite some time. However, lately **Techno** has become popular in less expected parts of the globe, where it fuses with regional world music. In Mexico, **Techno** mixes with Norteña and becomes “Nortec” (or Tecno Rifa) and in Brazil a new genre emerges known as “Tecnobrega”. Although **Techno** has barely renewed itself since its inception, one must regard this as proof of **Techno** being perhaps the most timeless of all super-genres. Partly because voice and singer personality give music a temporal frame, a mortal dimension. Early adversaries claimed that the fad **Techno** would soon become outdated, especially as it was so technology bound. Yet after thirty years it still is the ultimate DJ failsafe, regardless what kind of crowd.


### [1985] Detroit Techno
Although officially originated from **House**, **Techno** already had a slumbering pre-existence before that. In the depressing, cold “motor city” of Detroit, where high unemployment rates gave little reason to celebrate, a select few composers were working with analog sequencers on another type of Dance music. Something not meant for upper class euphoric celebration, but as a soundtrack for the lower class of this city of abandoned factories and machine-like rhythm. Based on the blueprint of **Funk**-influenced **Electro**, **Techno** evolved – borrowing the pounding beat from **Chicago House** – into a fast rhythm. The music is (almost) strictly instrumental, where any **Funk** influence is stripped down to its bare minimum. The emancipation of (electronic) rhythm became a fact; its future influence unforeseen and unimaginable.

**Detroit Techno** was first and foremost the brainchild of the three legendary Godfathers of Techno, known as the Belleville Three: *Juan Atkins* (the “Originator”), *Kevin Saunderson* (the “Elevator”) and *Derrick May* (the “Innovator”). The Belleville Three were already experimenting with electronic music in 1982, building further on the Electro legacy of Detroit nurtured by the Electrifying Mojo; this is known as Detroit Electro: Proto-Techno. It wasn’t after the explosion of **Chicago House** though, that **Techno** truly took form as the genre we know.

It is recommended to regard **Acid Techno** as a part of **Detroit Techno**. Old skool Detroit producers loved to experiment with the TB-303 and the two genres evolved simultaneously with large amounts of overlapping.

### [1987] New Beat
Once upon a time, there was a club in a strange country where they decided to take some brand new and exciting **Acid House** records, and play them at the lower 33rpm instead of their intentional 45rpm. The club was the famous Boccaccio and the country was Belgium: home to the gloomy and avant-garde **EBM**. The atmosphere and sounds of **EBM** matched perfectly the lower tempo of this “New Acid House Beat”, forming a gateway between Industrial and Dance and leading eventually to a whole new group of genres: **Hardcore**. The genre was not dark or depressing though. The sounds were heavy and sluggish, like a crushing giant, but the lyrics were a mix of fun and nonsense. With its rather slow 110bpm, **New Beat** formed a comfortable prologue for **House/Techno**, as the European public wasn’t ready yet for American 130bpm **House** or **Techno**. Eventually **New Beat** became too ridiculous (with opportunistic bands cashing in on a template of mystery and sex), which forced the original composers to flee the scene. But the foundations were already laid for a whole new super-genre that was not born to please the majority: **Hardcore**.

### [1990] Hardcore Techno / Rave
What Punk was to **Rock**, **Rave** was to Dance. The all-changing, undeniable shock-revolution, shaking things up that otherwise might have gone stale. In Germany and Belgium, young, militant DJ’s discovered the infamous “hoover” sound: an accelerated, distorted sound of an alien vacuum cleaner being turned on. In the beginning this dark and brutal European underground **Techno** was purely instrumental and barely melodic (such as the pioneering classic “Energy Flash” by Joey Beltram), but gradually the tempo increased and the hoover sounds were used to establish an anthem like, bombastic melody. This led to a sort of dance music unheard of: dark, hard, ecstatic, overwhelming. **Rave** became a party phenomenon, especially in the UK and the Netherlands: massive illegal and secret pop-up parties (called “Raves”) with excessive drug abuse were soon the target of a nationwide police hunt. This was even reflected in the music: alarm bells, sirens and other paranoia-inducing effects all added to the theatrical overstimulation that is **Rave**.

The most important aspect of **Rave** is undoubtedly XTC. What was already a small shock during **New Beat** and **Acid House**, completely erupted when the perfect XTC soundtrack was finally conceived. Stuff to intensify the XTC-rush such as gadgets, Vicks inhalers, glowsticks, and lasers were born in the era of **Rave** and were eventually transferred to contemporary dance culture.

Just like Punks or Goths, a new subcultural stereotype emerged: the “Raver”. With loose, flashy clothing of the early nineties slightly influenced by **Rap** fashion, Ravers lived in the center of a yolo-universe, where everyday could be their last (which it was for some). **Rave** was a way of life, reflected by the notorious creed: “Eat Sleep Rave Repeat”.

### [1991] (Free)Tek(k)no / Hardtek
**(Free)Tekno** is where **Classic Techno** meets the post-Rave cultural movement. Many (German) producers were eager to try out the faster BPM and hyperactive **Rave** sound effects of **Hardcore (Techno)** in a slightly more subtle, rhythmically looping approach. In the afterwake of the fall of the Berlin Wall, Germany heavily welcomes anarchistic and experimental music. But the genre really bursts open when British **Rave** producers and sound system crews are forced to flee the country after the initiation of the Criminal Justice Act in 1994. The result of these influences is **Rave** bended towards **Techno**: harsh, extremely fast (170-200bpm) and pounding; teKno (aka tekkno) instead of the softer, ambient teCHno. **Tekno** is also known as **Hardtek**, but the genre is not as hard as **Hardtechno**. In a wild and rapidly spreading scene across the European continent (diaspora), parties and DJ’s popped up out of nowhere, particularly in the Chech Republic and Hungaria. Suddenly anyone and everyone could make dance music, and **Techno** was no longer an American elite underground thing. In Europe, it became a full-scale, DIY, liberating pop culture: **Techno** was set free. The corresponding cultural movement is very similar to Rave but on a much smaller scale: sound systems and Tek(no) tribes (communities) join up at free pop-up festivals or parties, usually at illegal places. Despite trouble with authorities, especially at more recent **Hardtek** festivals, early Freetekno helped spread Dance awareness (albeit in a very reactionary manner) and spearheaded official funding for all EDM festivals and parties in Europe, whereas the US refused to do so at the time.

### [1992] Ambient Techno & IDM (Intelligent Dance Music)
The term **“Intelligent Dance Music”** or **IDM** (aka **Braindance**) is despised by both its practitioners as its opponents. This makes sense, as what exactly does make music intelligent? There certainly never was any intention to do so. Early **IDM** composers just wanted to create **Techno** music with analog instruments and samples. Just as the polarity one can find in **Drum ‘n’ Bass** (sophisticated/intellectual versus generic/ entertaining), **IDM** was the opposite pole of **Rave**: reserved, eclectic, slow, and determined to stay underground. This was no coincidence: especially **Breakbeat Hardcore** was responsible for the heavy backlash that is **IDM**. The songs have a complicated, unexpected structure and are compiled of a variety of analog effects, acid bleeps, washes, breaks and scratches. There’s often more than one bassline, as deep as possible. **IDM** is sometimes hard to separate from **Artcore/Jazzstep** or more experimental forms of Breakbeat, because the classic four-to-the-floor **Techno** beat is often abandoned. After the rise of **Jungle**, **IDM** starts to use **Drum ‘n’ Bass** rhythms as well, which makes the genre almost impossible to categorize within a single super-genre. For those who like to restrain from a certain degree of pigeonholing, **IDM** can be regarded as one with **Ambient Techno**, as they share a great deal of overlapping.

Like **Rave**, **IDM** was born in a series of illegal parties across the UK, but where they preferred the opposite type of music. Center point was the city of Sheffield, with the leading label Warp Records. At first the music was rather minimal and less experimental and called **Bleep Techno** or **Bleep ‘n’ Bass**. Eventually the genre mingled with early **Ambient House** and a bit of **Reggae** sound techniques into a form of music that still sounds fresh and unexpected today.

### [1994] Industrial Techno & Schranz I
**Detroit Techno** only had very limited popularity in the States. American DJ’s were forced to turn their eye on Europe and found the perfect breeding ground for **Techno** in Germany. When the Berlin wall falls in 1989, the city becomes an empty vessel, welcoming **Techno** with open arms. Abandoned Industrial buildings such as the famous Trésor in Berlin became seized by the masses as their church where **Techno** was the sermon. Germans were thirsty for hard, industrial, uncompromising beats, and under the influence of the Neue Deutsche Welle (German New Wave), Belgian Techno (**New Beat** meets early **Techno**) and **EBM**, **Detroit Techno** changes into a harder and faster (135 bpm) version of itself but particularly more abrasive. This second wave of **Detroit Techno** – aka **Industrial Techno** – is thereby an adaptation for a European audience by American producers, primarily known by its quintessential record labels: Underground Resistance (UR) and Plus 8 (+8). Although early UR and +8 records are more a part of **Detroit Techno**, the later works form a strong contrast with it, due to clearly a harder and rugged sound. Belgian R&S Records embraces American **Techno** producers as well, where some start to develop a slightly more euphoric sound towards **Rave**, known as **Brutal Techno**.

Around 1994, German **Techno** becomes even harder and faster, with maximum-intensity kick drums and an average bpm of 145. This specific genre was named **“Schranz”** by Chris Liebing, yet the term has no litteral translation. **Schranz** focuses less on bass than **Industrial Techno**, and more on distortion and repetition. **Industrial Techno**, **Brutal Techno** and **Schranz** exhibit a long evolution of **Detroit Techno** once it sets foot on European soil; a genre that clearly is hard to constrain, but rather a lineage that continuously strengthens and accelerates, culminating in **Hardtechno**.


### [1994] Minimal Techno
In the early nineties **Techno** was being contaminated by the things it defies most: melody, eclecticism, noise. Especially the anything-goes-mentality of **Freetechno** and the tempo-overdrive / noise-overdose of **Gabber Hardcore** became too much for a number of composers. **Minimal Techno** was their resort and the genre is exactly what you would expect: a simple 4/4 electronic kick beat, enhanced by rhythmical electronic sounds, but with barely anything more. Some authors even claim that **Minimal Techno** “is defined by what it denies itself”. **Minimal Techno** focuses more on slow and steady progression, and therefore can have much longer songs than regular **Techno**. Since all kind of melody is removed, it may be perceived as dark and menacing, a trait that sometimes gets enhanced in its sound manipulation. But because of its purity and simplicity, its appeal and sound is timeless, withstanding any change or revolution in the world of EDM since its birth. And this is exactly why many **Techno** fans adore Minimal; due to its purism it is furthest removed from **House**, **Trance**, and **Hardcore**: the paragon of **Techno**.

Two smaller **Techno** subgenres are closely related to **Minimal Techno**: the important **Dub Techno**, which features influences from **Dub** and recently regained popularity, and **Gloomcore**, a very obscure, darker form of **Minimal Techno**.


### [1998] Tech Trance
**Tech Trance** aka **Techno Trance** is indeed the middle ground between **Techno** and **Trance**. Although most songs tend to lean towards **Techno**, the majority of artists have a **Trance** background. **Tech Trance** differs from **Trance** by lacking build-ups or breakdowns, and melody is approached with restraint: no arpeggios, progressive evolution or multi-layering. Its **Trance** personality lies in the conjunction of distorted synthesized sounds into a repetitive leitmotif, over and over again. This is **Tech Trance’s** most recognizable trademark. One can hardly describe this motif as melody in a traditional, hypnotic **Trance** manner. Innovative and intensive use of delay on a recurring series of hard synth notes turns the genre more into a one-trick-pony, but with perfect execution of that trick. **Tech Trance** is also responsible for introducing side-chaining into the world of EDM: a technology to reduce the volume of certain frequencies, which is often used to create the illusion of a loud bassline.

Though originated in 1998, it wasn’t until 2006 that **Techno Trance** rose to the foreground. The strength of **Techno Trance** lies in a seducing “go-go” mentality: easy to get into, hard to stand still. Compared to e.g. **NRG**, **Tech Trance** is more uptempo and features an abundance of percussion assembled into complex, rushing rhythms: the craftsmanship of **Techno** married to the hypnotism of **Trance**.


### [2000] Hardtechno (Schranz II)
A constant and furious attack of hacking and rushing **Techno** beats at an incredible rate (150bpm or more), like a psychopathic wind-up toy wielding a sledge hammer: that is **Hardtechno**. Because **Hardtechno** is more an evolution of **Schranz** than a distinct successor, it also inherited its name as an alias. The genre slowly evolved out of early **Schranz**, **Gabber Hardcore,** and **Minimal Techno**, but is clearly distinguishable from other Hard EDM genres. The beats all sound very similar due to the minimalist nature of the genre and the recognizable **Hardtechno** rush distortions. Variation is added by sounds, samples and subtle melodies, which alternate each other and thereby enhance the rhythm and tempo. Typical **Hardtechno** kick drums are heavily distorted in such a way that they seem muted instead of punctuated like other Hard EDM genres; it’s like a filter of white noise is put on top of the rhythm.

**Hardtechno** has grown stronger and stronger, combining the love for purism with a hard edge mentality and a discipline to refrain from Ravey or explicit sounds. The downside – especially for any adversary - is that all songs sound incredibly alike, almost in a satirical manner. From 2007 on, most large EDM or Techno festivals have their own **Hardtechno** stage, and large club parties usually have a separate **Hardtechno** room as well, which is not very difficult to identify.
