## Trance
- [[1990] Classic Trance & Acid Trance](#1990-Classic-Trance--Acid-Trance)
- [[1993] Dream House/Trance & Ibiza House/Trance](#1993-Dream-HouseTrance--Ibiza-HouseTrance)
- [[1993] GOA Trance & Psytrance](#1993-Goa-Trance--Psytrance)
- [[1996] NRG, Hard NRG & (UK) Hard House](#1996-NRG-Hard-NRG--UK-Hard-House)
- [[1996] Progressive Trance](#1996-Progressive-Trance)
- [[1997] Eurotrance & Vocal Trance](#1997-Eurotrance--Vocal-Trance)
- [[1998] Tech Trance](../master/techno.md#1998-Tech-Trance)
- [[1999] Hardtrance](#1999-Hardtrance)
- [1999] UK Hardcore & Freeform / Trancecore & Acidcore
- [[2001] Uplifting Trance/Epic Trance](#2001-Uplifting-TranceEpic-Trance)
- [[2006] Neo Trance](#2006-Neo-Trance)

**Trance** focuses on melody more than any other music genre. The name reveals its purpose: **Trance** is supposed to hypnotize and entrance the listener, to provide escapism. Therefore most **Trance** songs are much longer than other EDM songs and are often mixed and remixed. Long track lengths mirror that of Downtempo, but **Trance** is faster and with a pronounced four-to-the-floor beat. **Trance** is supposed to entrance the listener on the dance floor, not at home. It should take you on a journey of both mind and body. Yet however important melody may be, it should not disturb **Trance’s** harmonious holy trinity of beat, bass, and melody.

It is no coincidence that the rise of **Trance** coincides with the fall of Rave. **Trance** became a refuge for worn out ravers, in pursuit of tranquillity instead of noisy hyper-stimulation. Unknowingly, **Trance** is less related to drugs as House or Hardcore Techno (though some subgenres know how to restore the balance). Trance compensates a world of hedonism with a world of spirituality and deeper experience. At least that’s what it often claims to be. Whether or not Trance’s notion of self-indulgence (of which it’s sometimes accused) is true, its magnetism on different EDM communities worked well. Especially in its countries of origin, which form a geographical “Trance triangle”: Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium.

**Trance** is recognizable by pronounced synth melodies which always form its core. All types of waveforms, modulations, and effects are discovered in the world of **Trance**. Synth melodies usually build up to theatrical climaxes: the crescendo. Crescendos are enhanced by arpeggios, rising pitches, or addition of layers (instruments, melodies). After the crescendo, melodies come down again with or without a breakdown, although a complete absence of melodic elements or synth stabs is quite rare because that way the entrancing might be lost. Just like modern **Drum ‘n’ Bass**, **Trance** needs computers to be produced. It favors digital technology over analog. This is why **Trance** is one of the youngest super-genres, and often produced with crystal clear sounds. **Trance** is not supposed to stop, its fast tempo (between 135 and 150bpm) eclipses even **House** and **Techno** and seamless mixes attempt to achieve one long **Trance** experience.

**Trance** used to be regarded as just a part of **House** or **Techno**, from which it originated. But over the course of time it developed into a fully-fledged super-genre, though a great deal of ignorance remains about its hierarchical status. This can be explained by the facts that most Trance DJ’s switch between different styles during their career and that the Trance community cares less about genre classification. **Trance** as a genre seems more unified than others, making it easy to be mistaken for a smaller style than it actually is. However, one should not underestimate the impact and influence of **Trance**. Many famous Dance songs, mistaken for **House** or **Techno**, are actually **Trance**. Rich, successful megastar DJ’s did not exist before **Trance** and EDM couldn’t maintain its momentum at the end of the nineties without **Trance**. At the beginning of the new millennium, Trance experienced massive mainstream success, which polarized its fan base into a commercial and alternative side. Lately, this dichotomy has ceased to be relevant as **Trance** itself is struggling to stay relevant. The future seems uncertain. But if you would like to travel with just music and no movement, **Trance** is still your best option.

### [1990] Classic Trance & Acid Trance
In the centre of the great electronic dance storm of the late eighties and early nineties, **House** music started to take on many forms. As both **Techno** and **Ambient** music had their influence on **Eurodance**, a whirlwind of (mostly temporary) subgenres confused many music enthusiasts: **Dream House**, **Handbag House**, **NRG**, **Anthem/Stadium House**, **Diva House**, **Ibiza House**, etc. It is within this surge of styles that the earliest evolutions of **Trance** can also be found. Like House and Techno, Trance features a strong four-to-the-floor kick beat and a similar bassline but unlike both of them, synthesizer melodies absolutely dominate any other part of the music. Usually there is more than one melody, strongly intertwined with the synth bassline, hereby creating a layered structure. To facilitate the hypnotic, entrancing effect of the music, the beat and rhythm are highly repetitive, with as little variation as possible. The earliest forms of Trance started in Germany, where House/Techno DJ’s created the plainest, purest Trance style. Particularly Frankfurt and Berlin were important havens of “Teutonic” (=German) Trance aka **Classic Trance**.

**Acid Trance** forms the link between **Acid House** and **Classic Trance**; thus it forms the earliest type of Trance, but acid sounds occur everywhere within Trance and a separation of these genres is pointless. **Classic Trance** is a highly varied genre and difficult to outline compared to later Trance genres, but its identity lies in sheer simplicity, serenity and harmony: **Classic Trance** searches for an enlightened state of consciousness without forcing itself onto the listener.

### [1993] Dream House/Trance & Ibiza House/Trance
On the warm and lush Balearic Islands, mainly Ibiza, lots of DJ’s found an ideal party heaven, far away from dirty cities and oppressing governments. But Ibiza did not become popular in the nineties to party – the island was a refuge for thousands and thousands of worn-out ravers, tired of a music scene spun out of control and too much drug abuse. Alongside the migration of gays, artists and social outcasts to this asylum, these ravers sought a musical healing treatment for after-Rave symptoms and withdrawals, which would ideally be a downtempo fusion of soft House (**Eurodance**) and **Trance**.

One result was an atmospheric genre fitting for the seaside environment. Not heavy at all, but a dreamlike soundscape with nature sounds or gentle piano melodies mixed onto a continuous Trance bass and beat: Dream House/Trance. Remarkably, Dream Trance was conceived as a means to counter the alarming rise of car accidents after raves, with a slow tempo of 130 bpm and the use of strings to keep the driver calm and focused.

Another result was similar but slightly more energetic, with less complex melodies and added vocals, like an ambient version of Eurodance: Balearic House/Trance or Ibiza House/Trance. Balearic Trance builds further on the local genre of the eighties: Balearic Beat: a summer-infused, ambient type of **Eurodisco**. Sometimes exotic samples such as Spanish guitars or bandoneons are added, which makes Ibiza even more a sanctuary to forget all troubles - a concept to which the famous Amnesia club owed its name.

### [1993] Goa Trance & Psytrance
Goa Trance and Psytrance, two technically different but very similar genres, started off early and slowly in the province of Goa, India. Here, spiritual refugee hippies sought new forms of psychedelic music as House and Techno conquered the world and Acid Rock was no longer hip. When Trance was invented, it quickly became the preferred music of choice, lending itself perfectly to accompany hallucinogenic drug experiences. Almost every element of Goa Trance is based on hallucinogenic drugs and trip experiences, particularly tryptamines like magic mushrooms, LSD, salvia divinorum, and DMT.

But Goa was not just a refuge: it was the destination of a long and adventurous hippie trail, starting in Ibiza, towards Marrakech, then the Middle East, across Asia to Kathmandu, and then finally India. All kinds of musical influences were brought along this trail, such as melodies and instruments from the Middle East, Ibiza, Dream, and Ambient Trance, and Indian Raga music. With all these influences and the possibilities of fresh Trance, Goa Trance (often abbreviated to “Goa”) rapidly transformed into the most complex, multi-layered dance music ever invented: a tsunami of psychedelic sound effects, intricate melodies, and hyperclean, punctuated kick beats. Goa often uses more simultaneous tracks (multi-tracking) than any other music genre: it is the perfect soundtrack for a lightning-speed transcendental journey into the unconscious mind. Yet Goa is far more than a music genre; Regular Goa parties around the world keep the spirit of a thriving subculture alive. Special Goa deco teams (who dress up parties with psychedelic fluorescent artwork) and multicultural markets reincarnate the sixties message of peace, love and open-mindedness in an entirely different sound and look.

Although Goa Trance has stayed its entire lifespan underground, it is truly a massive genre, popular in the most diverse range of countries (Israel, Brazil, India, Finland, Germany...) and with a plethora of well-established subgenres: Nitzhonot (Israeli fusion with Epic Trance), Full-On (heavily layered and energetic), Suomisaundi (Finnish rave-like minimal Goa), Dark Psy (scary bad trip Goa), Morning Trance (to be played outdoors at sunrise), Old Skool Goa-Trance and even more.

### [1996] NRG, Hard NRG & (UK) Hard House
A faster, more driven and more ecstatic version of **Eurodance** appeared on the Dance stage in 1995, and proved highly popular within gay circles. **NRG** means energy, and most suitably so: this is the “Go-Go of Dance”. A highly repetitive driven motif - like Techno with a bit of melody - goes on and on, driving the (gay) crowd bonkers. Hence Nu-NRG, the Hi-NRG version of the nineties, was born. In other words: (Nu-)NRG is the forth transmutation in a tremendous evolution of Disco-intensification (Disco → Hi-NRG = Eurodisco → House → Eurohouse → NRG = Nu-NRG). But this was not even the final stage.

Gradually, NRG becomes Hard NRG and heavily modified wave form melodies (often acid) and the use of hoover and other Rave sounds participate in the music. From innocent and energetic, NRG becomes dark and pulsing, like a quasar among genres. Hard NRG connects the world of House with that of Trance, as a crossroad for other genres. It helped House producers get acquainted with Trance, but in the late nineties, **Hard NRG** takes a step away from Trance into the final and most distant stage of Disco-intensification: **(UK) Hard House**.

Hard House is the ultimate bumper car music; the soundtrack of the fairground: flashing, pounding, building up and breaking loose. Hard House aka Retro House aka Stupid House aka Party House is characterized by hard bass stabs, silly samples, hoovers, and a fast tempo of 150bpm. Breakdowns are intensified, either by silence or drum rolls, and prelude harsh climaxes. Because the American Press uses Hard House as an umbrella label for any type of Hard Dance, the specific term “UK Hard House” is being reserved for this genre (a poor choice, considering the fact that Hard House is even more popular in Germany, the Netherlands, and Belgium)

### [1996] Progressive Trance
One of the most complicated stories in popular music history is the tangle between **Progressive House** and **Progressive Trance**. The House version is very, very Trancelike and the Trance version is strongly influenced by House. Furthermore, both genres have experienced a multi-wave evolution throughout their history and borrowed each others names, confusing even the more seasoned EDM-experts. Despite certain beliefs, they are not the same, and being both large and long-lasting genres, it is recommended treating them as such.

The word “Progressive” in Progressive House and Trance points to a progress of chords within the music: the song gradually evolves over the course of time. **Progressive Trance** appears after and is influenced by (the second wave of) Progressive House. Between mainstream, radio-edited **Ibiza/Dream Trance** and underground, uncompromising **Psytrance**, there was need for a flexible middle ground. Inspired by the success and formula of **Deep House**, Trance evolves into much longer songs (thus easier to mix) with extended build-ups, chords and breakdowns. With an average tempo lower than most Trance (around 130bpm) and heavy use of reverb, delay and washing sounds, **Progressive Trance** aims at a serious sound. Slightly heavy and gloomy and more subtle in its approach of melody (usually in a minor key), the genre is perhaps one of the most effective Trance genres to well up images from another reality.

Just like Progressive House, the genre has no boundaries edged in stone. There is much music that falls somewhere between Progressive and something else, such as **Tech House**, **Tech Trance**, **Hardtrance**, or whatnot. After **Epic Trance’s** peak after the turn of the millennium, **Progressive Trance** retakes its position as the primary force within Trance.

### [1997] Eurotrance & Vocal Trance
When the great **Eurodance** craze was finally about to lay down (around 1997), a new hit chart oriented Dance music took its place.**Dream Trance**, **Ibiza Trance** & **Classic Trance** remixes by big Trance Producers and pioneering **Uplifting Trance** tracks start to show up sporadically in the second half of the nineties on mainstream radio and hit charts. Taking cues from this new and exciting music, **Eurohouse** transformed into **Eurotrance**. **Vocal Trance** is a specific and very popular type of **Eurotrance** with female verses and melancholic or emotional choruses.

**Eurotrance** and particularly **Vocal Trance** have a clear radio-friendly orientation: songs are edited singles, not long mix tracks. Therefore, **Vocal Trance** is more structured, both in harmony and melody, than any other form of **Trance**, and most similar to Pop music, giving it its alias: **Poptrance**. The genre became most popular in the same countries where **Eurohouse** was: Germany, Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden, and the UK.

Though rather small and modestly influential, **Vocal Trance** tremendously helped spread Trance to a much greater audience. Together with **Uplifting Trance**, **Vocal Trance** forms “commercial” Trance, which lost popularity after 2002 in favor of more “underground” types of Trance: Tech, Hard, and Progressive. This loss can partially be explained by an exuberant abundance of commercial trance, which left adversaries to choke in their loathing. But the merit of commercial Trance cannot be swooped under the rug: bringing a massive amount of Dance-crazed people together in an ecstatic environment without drug excesses or hassle reports.

### [1999] Hardtrance
One: **Progressive Trance** and Hard House/NRG lead to a steep rise of discotheques across Europe during the mid-nineties, sometimes even dance temples too large for urban centers. Herein, these genres get mixed, remixed and start growing towards each other. This can be regarded as the first (proto) wave of **Hardtrance** and the third wave of **Progressive Trance**.
Two: the average MDMA-content in an ecstasy tablet nearly doubles within a short timespan at the end of the nineties due to enhanced manufacturing.
Three: unwillingly retired **Breakbeat Hardcore** (Rave) producers are in search for new, unthreaded sound territory and discover the potential of early Hardtrance for ecstatic mass-catered music.

One + Two + Three = the third wave of Rave, fully matured right before the new millennium into Hardtrance. Hoover and acid sounds, and reverb on very hard kick beats give Hardtrance that Ravey feeling. Mega-discotheques start to rise, with heavy laser use, gadgets and stimulating go-go dancers. Here is little room for interpretation: Rave is back, but in disguise. Female or distorted vocal samples with a haunting and sinister but promiscuous touch accumulate to an already dark and melancholic sound: this is music for the long night, driving from club to club without a sense of time. The British Gatecrasher clubs were particularly responsible for making the genre popular.

With an average tempo between 140-180 bpm, **Hardtrance** is very fast; its bassline is deep and driving. But leading synth melodies come less to the foreground or are replaced by synth stabs, partially as a response to the commercialism of mainstream **Uplifting Trance**. The beats become even stronger and Rap elements turn up when **Breakbeat Hardcore** producers have their way with **Hardtrance**. After 2001, the genre becomes harder once more, less melodic and progressive, and gradually evolves into **Hardstyle**.

### [2001] Uplifting Trance/Eric Trance
**Uplifting Trance** (also referred to as **Epic Trance** or **Anthem Trance**) finds its origin in the mid and late nineties out of **Progressive Trance**. In Germany a number of songs become even longer and slightly faster than usual (136-144bpm). Chord progression increases and especially breakdown sections become incredibly long to build up to a postponed apotheosis. Gradually, more and more elements get thrown into the mix to enhance the joyful, euphoric feeling **Uplifting Trance** is all about (such as strings, high-octave melodies, female vocal samples and layered arpeggios). This is not uncontrolled ecstasy tearing down the house like many previous Dance genres; **Epic Trance** is a new kind of sensation: euphoric bliss symbolized by a mass of waving hands, daytime venues and lasers. However, this comes at the expense of a negligence of bass, described as simplistic and highly repetitive. **Epic Trance** has much longer songs than **Eurotrance**, meant for festivals or dance events, whereas the latter genre is more aimed at record sales and radio broadcasting.

In 2001, Dutch producers start to invent the “supersaw” sound, which combines multiple sawtooth synth waves to create an ethereal, oversensational melody and a new term arrives: “Dutch Trance”. This moment marks an enormous eruption of **Uplifting Trance**, where the genre lurks out of the underground into heavily marketed mainstream mega events. Dutch Trance signals the rise of the DJ as an international superstar. Because of its large focus on the most characteristic Trance elements (breakdowns, build-ups, climatic, long arpeggios) and its brief moment of international fame, **Uplifting Trance** is also known as “Pure Trance”. A noun firmly resented by the opposite side of Classic and underground Trance lovers.

### [2006] Neo Trance
The newest style of **Trance**, **Neo-Trance**, is the further progress of **Progressive Trance**, albeit in a minimal direction. This genre obviously is more melodic than its inspirations, minimal **House** and **Techno**. But the melody has no builds or climaxes nor is it anything anthem-like or sensational. It fades into the background, barely capable of entrancing the listener. Combined with a slower average bpm than most **Trance**, **Neo-Trance** might pretty accurately be described as ambient minimal **Trance**. The breezing, gentle melodies and soft kicks make **Neo-Trance** summer club music, reminding of Balearic Trance. But there is also compression and gritty distortion on the basslines, like a dark threat penetrating through an atmosphere that seems serene and harmless at first sight. Ironically, the music does not come from Ibiza at all but Denmark and Germany, where the last remnants of Trance dissolve into this generic crossover, accused by critics of self-indulgence and artificial sophistication. In those same countries, a minimal form of Goa simply named Minimalist Psytrance, rises as well; a sign that after years and years of “maximalist” Rave and Trance genres, there is only one direction left to go.
